{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff0\deflang1033\deflangfe1044{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f2\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 02070309020205020404}Courier New;}{\f3\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05050102010706020507}Symbol;}{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Times;}
{\f5\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Helvetica;}{\f6\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Courier;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Geneva;}
{\f8\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Tms Rmn;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Helv;}{\f10\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Serif;}
{\f11\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Sans Serif;}{\f12\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}New York;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}System;}
{\f14\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05000000000000000000}Wingdings;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq3{\*\panose 020b0604030504040204}Tahoma;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;
\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;
\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid \snext0 Normal;}{\s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \b\f1\fs28\lang1044\kerning28\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{
\s2\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \b\i\f1\lang1044\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{\s3\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\lang1044\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\s15\fi-283\li283\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext15 List;}{\s16\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext0 Salutation;}{
\s17\fi-360\li360\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\jclisttab\tx360{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pndec }\ls1\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext17 \sautoupd List Bullet;}{\s18\sa120\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid 
\sbasedon0 \snext18 Body Text;}{\s19\li283\sa120\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext19 Body Text 2;}{\s20\fi-360\li643\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\jclisttab\tx643{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pndec }\ls2\adjustright 
\fs28\lang1044\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext20 \sautoupd List Bullet 2;}{\s21\sa120\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid \sbasedon18 \snext21 Linje for forfatternavn;}}{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid-363275722\listsimple{\listlevel
\levelnfc23\leveljc0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace0\levelindent0{\leveltext\'01\u-3913 ?;}{\levelnumbers;}\f3\fbias0 \s20\fi-360\li643\jclisttab\tx643 }{\listname ;}\listid-125}{\list\listtemplateid-833448600\listsimple{\listlevel\levelnfc23
\leveljc0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace0\levelindent0{\leveltext\'01\u-3913 ?;}{\levelnumbers;}\f3\fbias0 \s17\fi-360\li360\jclisttab\tx360 }{\listname ;}\listid-119}}{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid-119\listoverridecount0\ls1}
{\listoverride\listid-125\listoverridecount0\ls2}}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\info
{\title \'c1taremma i \'eba han \'eba, na aire esselya, aranielya na tuluva, na care ind\'f3melya cemende tambe Erumande : \'e1men anta s\'edra ilaur\'eba massamma, ar \'e1men apsene \'facaremmar s\'edv' emme apsanet tien i \'facarer emmen}
{\author Helge K\'e5re Fauskanger}{\operator Helge K\'e5re Fauskanger}{\creatim\yr2002\mo5\dy15\hr17\min48}{\revtim\yr2002\mo5\dy15\hr17\min48}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages68}{\nofwords30275}{\nofchars172569}{\*\company  }{\nofcharsws211926}{\vern73}}
\margl1417\margr1417\margt1417\margb1417 \deftab708\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphhotz425\formshade\viewkind4\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot \fet0\sectd \linex0\headery709\footery709\colsx709\sectdefaultcl {\*\pnseclvl1
\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid {\b\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \li2832\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx1134\adjustright {\b\fs40\lang2057\cgrid0  J.R.R. TOLKIEN'S 
\par }\pard \li708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\i\fs52\lang2057\cgrid0 LORD'S PRAYER}{\b\fs52\lang2057\cgrid0  AND }{\b\i\fs52\lang2057\cgrid0 HAIL MARY}{\b\fs52\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }\pard \li3540\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\fs40\lang2057\cgrid0 IN QUENYA
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par 
\par }\pard \fi708\li1416\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\fs36\lang2057\cgrid0 Syntactical and Etymological Analysis
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }\pard \li1416\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 \tab \tab \tab }{\b\i\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 By H. K. Fauskanger
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\i\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par Bibliographical Abbreviations}{\b\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par 
\par Etym. \endash  }{\b\i\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 The Etymologies}{\b\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0  (in LR:347-400)
\par GL \endash  }{\b\i\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 The Gnomish Lexicon}{\b\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0  (in }{\b\i\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 Parma Eldalamberon}{\b\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0  #11)
\par Letters \endash  }{\b\i\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien
\par }{\b\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 LotR \endash  }{\b\i\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 The Lord of the Rings
\par }{\b\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 LR \endash  }{\b\i\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 The Lost Road
\par }{\b\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 MC \endash  }{\b\i\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 The Monsters and the Critics}{\b\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par MR \endash  }{\b\i\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 Morgoth's Ring}{\b\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par PM \endash  }{\b\i\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 The Peoples of Middle-earth
\par }{\b\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 QL \endash  }{\b\i\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 The Qenya Lexicon}{\b\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0  (in }{\b\i\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 Parma Eldalamberon}{\b\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0  #12)
\par RGEO \endash  }{\b\i\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 The Road Goes Ever On}{\b\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0  (second edition)
\par RS \endash  }{\b\i\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 The Return of the Shadow}{\b\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par SD \endash  }{\b\i\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 Sauron Defeated
\par }{\b\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 UT \endash  }{\b\i\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 Unfinished Tales}{\b\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par VT \endash  }{\b\i\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 Vinyar Tengwar}{\b\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par WJ \endash  }{\b\i\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 The War of the Jewels}{\b\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par J.R.R. TOLKIEN'S }{\b\i\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 LORD'S PRAYER}{\b\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0  AND }{\b\i\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 HAIL MARY}{\b\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0  IN QUENYA: Syntactical and etymological analysis
\par }{\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [This analysis was originally published in }{\i\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 Tyali\'eb Tyelelli\'e9va}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  #18. Shortly afterwards, another analysis appeared in }{\i\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 Vinyar Tengwar}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
 #43. The authors of the latter analysis were able to draw on various other Tolkien manuscripts that occasionally throws some light on the more obscure features of the Quenya text. Some information from this article has been added \endash 
 in brackets and with red letters \endash  to my own analysis. Otherwise, my original published text remains virtually unaltered.]}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par 
\par }{\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 1. Introduction}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par 
\par J.R.R. Tolkien was a man of faith, and in subtle ways his beliefs and philosophical notions were reflected in his narratives. "}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 The Lord of the Rings}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is of course a fundamentally religious and Catholic work," he noted in 1953, "unconsciously so at first, but consciously in the
 revision" (Letters:172). Still there are no direct or explicit references to Christianity or Catholicism in LotR, or for that matter in }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 The Hobbit}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 The Silmarillion}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. It has, however, long been known that Tolkien made a Quenya translation of the Lord's P
rayer (Matthew 6:9-13). This, of course, does not mean that he planned to insert this prayer into his invented world; the long ages of Middle-earth supposedly far predated the time of Jesus, so this would be historically impossible even within the fiction
al context. Rather we should see this translation as a confirmation of Tolkien's statement that to him, it was the invented languages and not the fictional history that was the primary thing: "}{\lang2057 
The invention of languages is the foundation. The 'stories' were made rather to provide a world for the languages than the reverse. To me a name comes first and the story follows" (Letters:219).}{\lang2057\cgrid0  
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang2057\cgrid0 Some have contended that Tolkien's languages are so inextricably bound up with his fiction that they literally would not mak
e any sense if removed from the Middle-earth setting, the languages }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 as such}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 being dismissed as nothing but figments of "literary art". Such a view, however, seems to represent a sad diminishing of Tolkien's efforts, as well as a profound lack of appreciati
on for the infinite flexibility of Language. On occasion, Tolkien himself might modestly dismiss his languages as "nonsense" or a "mad hobby" (MC:239, Letters:8), but in reality he did know the nature and potential of his work: }{\lang2057 
He noted about his languages that they "}{\i\lang2057 have some existence}{\lang2057 
, since I have composed them in some completeness" (Letters:175, emphasis added). Hence they could in principle be used to translate any text, even if the text as such had no direct connection to the narratives or the invente
d world. And as can now be seen, Tolkien }{\i\lang2057 did}{\lang2057  produce at least one such translation: a Quenya version not only of the }{\i\lang2057 Pater Noster}{\lang2057  or Lord's Prayer, but also of the }{\i\lang2057 Ave Maria}{\lang2057 
 or Hail Mary. The two are written consecutively and may well be considered one work. This is presently the sole known example of Tolkien rendering into one of his languages a text not originating with himself.
\par Why did Tolkien translate these prayers? It seems quite unlikely that he actually }{\i\lang2057 used}{\lang2057  the Quenya versions in his own worship. In }{\i\lang2057 Vinyar Tengwar}{\lang2057 
 #32, where Carl F. Hostetter and Patrick Wynne presented their own Quenya version of the Lord's Prayer (made before they got to see Tolkien's translation), Hostetter in his editorial observed: "Translations of the Lord's Prayer have enjoye
d a long tradition as representative texts for use in side-by-side comparisons of various languages." But since Tolkien apparently never made any efforts to have his Quenya-language Lord's Prayer published, it does not seem that he intended it to be a gen
eral "sample" of the language. Most likely he wrote down these texts for no more profound reason than his own amusement \endash 
 which should not, however, be taken as an indication of a frivolous attitude towards these prominent religious texts. The translation as such was probably serious enough, all the more so since these prayers would be important to Tolkien as a Catholic.}{
\i\lang2057 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang2057\cgrid0 \tab Quenya texts as substantial as this one rarely appear. If we limit the scope to what is more or less LotR-style Quenya, the only substanti
al texts (as opposed to isolated words or short or unconnected sentences) that have been available so far number no more than three or four. They are }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 in LotR (and RGEO:66-67), the latest version of the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Last Ark}{\lang2057\cgrid0  poem in MC:221-222, }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 F\'edriel's Song}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in LR:72, and }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Cirion's Oath}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 in UT:305, 317. F\'edriel's Song is not even quite LotR-style Quenya, and Cirion's Oath consists of only two sentences. The addition to our corpus of the 73-word Lord's Prayer/Hail Mary text, which may even be post-LotR, must therefor
e be seen as an important event, justifying a quite thorough analysis.
\par \tab The analysis here offered is organised into three parts. The first, relatively brief part will simply establish a }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Text}{\lang2057\cgrid0  to be analysed. In this case, Tolkien's handwriting is luckily qu
ite legible and unambiguous, with only a few uncertain points (such as the distribution of spaces). I will (summarily) try to justify the readings I prefer, often based on examples of Quenya that were published earlier.
\par \tab The next part, the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Syntactical/Analytical Commentary}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, will match the texts with typical English versions and analyse the Quenya versions word by word, but yet within the textual context: This is where observations regarding syntactical relationships within the text will be set out.
\par \tab The }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Lexical/Etymological Commentary}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 constitutes the final and by far the longest part of this analysis, providing detailed studies of the individual words, organised alphabetically. Here I will discuss how these words relate to material that has been published ea
rlier, and try to infer what history and etymology Tolkien may have imagined for the various words and elements. Still, this is not to be taken as a mini-version of a Quenya Etymological Dictionary; while I will sometimes go into greater detail than a mer
e
 technical analysis of the text before us might seem to warrant, I will try to maintain the connection with the text itself. So to ensure easy referencing, nearly all of the entry-heads cite the word in the exact form it has in this text, including any in
flectional or pronominal endings \endash  which are then discussed in that same entry, or in the case of endings occurring repeatedly, cross-referenced to the entry for another word exemplifying that suffix. (A few suffixed elements that occur }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 repeatedly}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in the te
xt are however given separate entries, if that seems convenient, but no attempt is here made to be entirely consistent regarding such details of the presentation. Hence you will find a separate entry for the pronominal ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mma}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 our}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , whereas the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thy}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is discussed in the entry for }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 esselya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thy name}{\lang2057\cgrid0 .) The discussion of various technical oddities will be worked into the Lexical Commentary wherever it is convenient; thus there is a discussion of some of the strange }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 aorists}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  occurring in these texts in the entry for the word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 care}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, simply because this word provided a good opportunity to discuss the normal aorist formation and its apparent diachronic development. By using concrete words and forms found in the texts as the starting-point for such discours
es, I hope to avoid making the discussions needlessly abstract.
\par \tab At the end will be found a }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Summary}{\lang2057\cgrid0  recapitulating the major new insights provided by this text. Here I will slip into a perspective that is "practical" rather than strictly academic: I tend t
o be mindful about the needs of people who want to write or compose in Quenya themselves, since many aspire to do this, usually being very anxious to stay within the framework of Tolkien's system and not distort or dilute it.
\par \tab The discussions below will in
volve extensive comparison with earlier published sources. These will normally be referred to by book (denoted by the common abbreviations) and page. However, in the case of two sources, I shall simply refer to them by name with no further references. The
y are:
\par \tab }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0 : Also known as Galadriel's Lament, this is by far the longest Quenya text in LotR, occurring in }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 The Fellowship of the Ring}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, Book Two, near the end of chapter VIII ("Farewell to L\'f3rien"), beginning: }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Ai! lauri\'eb lantar lassi s\'farinen}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ...}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\lang2057\cgrid0 The Cormallen Praise:}{\lang2057\cgrid0  The praise received by the Ringbearers on the Field of Cormallen in }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 The Return of the King}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, Book Six, chapter IV ("The Field of Cormallen"). The parts we shall here refer to are these: }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Daur a Berhael, Conin en Ann\'fbn! }{\lang2057\cgrid0 ... }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 A laita te, laita te! Andave laituvalmet!}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 ... }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Cormacolindor, a laita t\'e1rienna!}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (Cf. SD:47.) The first exclamation is in Sindarin, the two others are Quenya. Letters:308 provides these translations: "Frodo and Sam, princes of the west, glorify (them)." 
\endash  "Bless them, bless them, long we will praise them." \endash  "The Ring bearers, bless (or praise) them to the height."
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 NOTE:}{\lang2057\cgrid0  In the following discussions, the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 asterisk}{\lang2057\cgrid0  * is prefixed only in the case of genuinely unattested forms or sentences (wrong forms are marked with a double aster
isk). "Primitive" or ancestral forms quoted by Tolkien himself, that he often asterisked, must actually be counted just as authoritative as the "attested" forms. These fictional "reconstructions" are not here asterisked, but are simply referred to as "pri
m
itive" or "ancestral". A distinction is here made between "unattested" or "reconstructed" forms and sentences, which are marked with *, and "deconstructed" words, that are marked with the symbol # instead. The latter is used in the case of word-forms that
 are not "constructed" but simply }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 isolated}{\lang2057\cgrid0  from the attested form, e.g. #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ind\'f3me}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 will}{\lang2057\cgrid0  isolated from }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ind\'f3melya
}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thy will}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . However, mere grammatical affixes isolated from the main word are usually not so marked, since they do not appear as independent words any
way; the symbol # is only used in the case of endings that cannot be isolated with full confidence.
\par \tab Though I normally regularize the spelling of Tolkien's languages, especially in my own compositions, I have here retained the spelling used in the sources 
for the sake of academic accuracy. Thus there is here some inconsistency regarding such variant spellings as }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 k}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 c}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 q}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 qu}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and the use of the diaeresis.
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 2. The Text
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\lang2057 Tolkien wrote his text on a piece of stationery (hence the words "From Professor J.R.R.
 Tolkien, Merton College, Oxford" at the top). The text of the prayers is not written in quite modern letters, but in a medieval-style script, Tolkien apparently amusing himself by producing something with the look and feel of an "ancient manuscript". Mor
e specifically, he appears to have imitated a hand historically used for Anglo-Saxon. The most peculiar feature of this style of writing is the shape of the letters }{\b\lang2057 s}{\lang2057  and }{\b\lang2057 r}{\lang2057 
, that look more like modern-day }{\b\lang2057 r}{\lang2057  and }{\b\lang2057 p}{\lang2057 , respectively (for instance, the words }{\b\lang2057 s\'ed ar}{\lang2057 
 "now and" in the middle of the second-to-last line of the manuscript are written in a way that to a modern reader would rather suggest "r\'ed
 ap"). Instead of regular commas Tolkien uses dots, and instead of full stops normally what looks like a modern colon; a regular full stop is however found following the word }{\b\lang2057 emmen}{\lang2057 .
\par }{\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par I shall base my analysis on the following reading of Tolkien's text:
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par \'c1taremma i \'eba han \'eba }{\b\lang2057 \'b7}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0  na aire esselya }{\b\lang2057 \'b7}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0  aranielya na tuluva }{\b\lang2057 \'b7}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0  na care ind\'f3melya cemende tambe Erumande : \'e1men anta s\'edra
 ilaur\'eba massamma }{\b\lang2057 \'b7}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0  ar \'e1men apsene \'facaremmar s\'edv' emme apsenet tien i \'facarer emmen. \'c1lame tulya \'fasahtienna mal \'e1me etelehta ulcullo : n\'e1sie : Aia Mar\'eda quanta Eruanno i H\'e9ru as elye }{
\b\lang2057 \'b7}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0  aistana elye im\'edca n\'edsi }{\b\lang2057 \'b7}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0  ar aistana i y\'e1ve m\'f3nalyo Y\'e9sus : Aire Mar\'eda Eruo ontaril \'e1 hyame r\'e1men \'facarindor s\'ed ar l\'famesse ya firuvamme : n\'e1
sie :
\par }{\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par In the manuscript, four words occurring at the end of a line are divided by a hyphen, the word continuing on the next line: }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 massa-mma}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'fa-sahtienna}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 m
\'f3n-alyo}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 firu-vamme}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . It seems certain that the hyphens divide the words simply because of lack of space and should not otherwise be included. (In the case of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 firu-vamme}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , the hyphen is quite large and elaborate, but since it intrudes in the middle of a morpheme \endash  the future-tense ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 uva}{\lang2057\cgrid0  \endash  there can be no regular division here.)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang2057\cgrid0 The text above certainly is not the only possible reading. The distribution of spaces is vague; }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba han}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 as elye}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  could be read as single words (}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'ebahan}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aselye}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). }{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [VT43 prefers the one-word reading }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 aselye}{
\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 .]}{\lang2057\cgrid0  A few of the accents (indicating long vowels) are unclear; if they are there at all, they are obscured by descending elements of the letters above. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Im\'edca}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 may also be read }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'edm\'edca}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , both }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\lang2057\cgrid0 's being long. When I read }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 y\'e1ve}{\lang2057\cgrid0  with a long }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, it is primarily because all other sources have a long }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in this word and related words (}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 y\'e1ve}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 fruit}{\lang2057\cgrid0  by itself in LR:399 s.v. }{
\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 yab}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and as the last entry in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Silmarillion}{\lang2057\cgrid0  Appendix; cf. also }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 y\'e1vi\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 autumn}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 harvest}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in LotR, Appendix D). There just might be an accent above the }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{\lang2057\cgrid0  here as
 well, merged into the letter above; however, without the help of other sources I would probably have read }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 yave}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , and that may be the actual reading here }{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [so in VT43]}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1 hyame}{\lang2057\cgrid0  could very well be read as one word, }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1hyame}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ; I prefer reading }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as a separate wor
d because this imperative particle is not directly prefixed to the following verb in our very few other examples, such as }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1 vala}{\lang2057\cgrid0  rather than *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1vala}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in WJ:404. }{
\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [VT43 agrees with me in reading }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1 hyame}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 .]}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par The manuscript itself provides definite clues to the da
ting. For one thing, since this is on Merton College stationery, it cannot be earlier than 1945 (when Tolkien moved from Pembroke to Merton). The spelling of the Quenya text is also interesting: we repeatedly have }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 c}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 rather than }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 k}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , and the word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 quanta}{\lang2057\cgrid0  "full" provides an example of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 qu}{\lang2057\cgrid0  rather than }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 q}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. Students of Tolkien's languages will know that in the pre-LotR period, Tolkien usually wrote }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 q}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 k}{\lang2057\cgrid0  rather than }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 qu}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 c}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (indeed the name of the language itself was spelt "Qenya"). Various philological clues, discussed
 in detail in the Lexical Commentary below, seem to suggest that this text is not younger than the LotR Appendices (in particular, see the entry for the word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ilaur\'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0  concerning the element }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
aur\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). This takes us to 1955 or later, but not later than 1959-60 (when a certain phonological feature, found in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 of the thirties but apparently abandoned in the text before us, seems to have been re-instituted \endash  see the entry }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 care}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in the Lexical Commentary). The word #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 massa}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (rather than }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 masta}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ) for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 bread}{\lang2057\cgrid0  also points to the fifties; see the entry }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 massamma}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Instead of the word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ontaril}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 mother}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 begetter}{\lang2057\cgrid0  we might have expected *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nostaril}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 based on a last-minute change Tolkien did in the final volume of LotR (SD:73); this may suggest that our text (slightly?) predates this minute change. If we date this text to 1955, we shall probably not err much. It }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 may}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  be a little earlier, but not much: the word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0  occurring in this text does not seem to have entered Tolkien's mythos before 1951 (see LR:338, MR:7, 31 regarding }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'cba}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  or }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 E\'e4}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as a name of the universe). The word #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1la}{\lang2057\cgrid0  "do not" incorporates -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 la}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 as a negative element "not", but "possibly soon after the publication of }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 The Lord of the Rings}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ", Tolkien abandoned this element (see VT42:32). He reintroduced it in the last year
s of his life, but this text is certainly older than ca. 1970. All things considered, it seems quite unlikely that Tolkien made these translations earlier than 1951 or later than 1955.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 3. Syntactical/Analytical Commentary: The Textual Context Analysed
\par }{\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 I. THE LORD'S PRAYER
\par }{\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1taremma i \'eba han \'eba }{\b\lang2057 \'b7}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Our father who art in heaven,}{\b\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 It is not quite certain that this traditional English wording of the prayer actually corresponds to the Quenya text, though it certainly begins with the words "our Father who art...": }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1taremma}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "our father", sc. #}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1tar}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "father" (other sources have }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 atar}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  with a short }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ) + -}{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 mma}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "ours", with a connecting vowel -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 - slipped in between the noun and the ending to avoid an impossible consonant cluster. This ending -}{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 mma}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  denotes an }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 exclusive}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "our"; }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1taremma}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is not used for "our father" when his children are talking about him among themselves (that is *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1tarelma}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
), but when they are addressing another party that is not among his children: In this case, it is the father himself that is being addressed. }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "who", relative pronoun. }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "is" or "exists", }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 han}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 a hitherto unknown word that according to the normal English wording of the prayer ought to be the preposition "in" (though it is wholly dissimilar to the normal word for "in", }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 mi}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ). See the Lexical Commen
tary for further discussion of this word. }{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [VT43 argues that }{\b\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 han}{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  means "beyond".] }{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 The second }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  would correspond to "heaven". If this is a noun, it would have to be equated with }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 E\'e4}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , the well-known Quenya name of the created universe, despite the fact that i
n the text before us it is not capitalized. This word is a surprising choice as a translation for "heaven"; Tolkien did not even use it when translating "thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven" a few lines down. If }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 han}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  is a preposition, it would seem to somehow describe Eru's position in relation to E\'e4, and in light of the normal wording of the prayer, Eru must in some sense be "in" E\'e4. Perhaps }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 han}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  may mean something along the lines of "permeating"? Yet in what precise sense Eru is present within E\'e4 was something of a mystery even to the inhabitants of Middle-earth, as is evident from the }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
Athrabeth Finrod ah Andreth}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  (MR:322: "How could Eru enter into the thing [E\'e4] that He has made, and that which He is beyond measure greater? ... He is already in it, 
as well as outside...but indeed the 'in-dwelling' and the 'out-living' are not in the same mode... So may Eru in that mode be present in E\'e4
 that proceeded from him"). Of course, when trying to interpret a translation of a text that belongs to our world rat
her than Tolkien's invented world, attempting to glean information from his mythos may be beside the point. Perhaps Tolkien simply meant to say something like *"our Father who is in (?) the universe". It should be noted, though, that there is an old }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Gnomish}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  text that seems to feature a preposition }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 han}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  = "above" (see the relevant entry in the Lexical Commentary below for reference). If this is what }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 han}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  means here, Tolkien would seem to have rephrased "who art in heaven" to "who art above the universe", perha
ps because people within his mythos "did not conceive of the sky as a divine residence" (Letters:204; cf. the entry }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Erumande}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  in the Lexical Commentary).}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \tab Another, even more ingenious interpretation could be that Tolkien here did }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 not}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  translate "who art in h
eaven", but substituted another Bible-based phrase, namely God's self-designation "I am that I am" or "I am who I am" (Exodus 3:14; Hebrew }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 `ehyeh `asher `ehyeh}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
). Could Tolkien have re-phrased the first line of the prayer as *"our Father who art that thou art"? This would allow us to interpret }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  as a verb in both of its occurrences. If this is so, }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 han}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  would have to mean something like *"that" or *"that which". However, this theory seems difficult to maintain, even apart from the fact that a devout Catholic 
would hardly feel free to significantly rephrase the Lord's Prayer. If }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 i \'eba han \'eba}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  is to mean *"who art that thou art", the second }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 would be expected to include a second person pronominal ending (probably -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 lye}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ), but no such suffix is present. Moreover, such an interpretation would require that }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  can be used as a copula (like }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e1}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ), but our few examples hint that this is not so. The verb }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  (also spelt }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 e\'e4}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ) may be translated "is", but we have no example of it being used to connect a subject with a noun or an
 adjective; rather it means "exists", and so Tolkien translated it in at least one case (VT39:7). Hence in Cirion's Oath (UT:305, 317) we have the sentence }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 i Eru i or ilye mahalmar }{\i\fs24\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 e\'e4}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , "the One who }{\fs24\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 is}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  above all thrones": Eru }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 exists}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  in this sublime position; }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 or ily\'eb mahalmar}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "above all thrones" may here be seen as an }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 adverbial}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  phrase rather than a predicate. No matter how we interpret the precise syntax, this example indicates that }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  rather than }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e1}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  is used for "is" when a subject is to be connected to a pre
positional phrase denoting a position. It seems most reasonable, then, to assume that }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1taremma i \'eba han \'eba}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is another example of this, and that this means something along the lines of *"our Father who is in E\'e4" (though the precise meaning of }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 han}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , that we t
ake to be a preposition of some sort, must remain as uncertain as the spatial relation between Eru and E\'e4). }{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [VT43 takes }{\b\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 i \'eba han \'eba}{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  as meaning "who is beyond E
\'e4", which would certainly not be a direct translation of "who is in heaven". If this is the correct interpretation, it is still surprising that the second }{\b\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  is not capitalized as }{
\b\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 E\'e4}{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  or }{\b\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 \'cba}{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 , to identify it as a proper name.]}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par \tab }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1taremma i \'eba han \'eba}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  provides a new example of the word order used in a relative phrase. Here we have }{\scaps\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 subject }{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 + }{
\scaps\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 relative pronoun}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  + }{\scaps\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 verb }{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 + }{\scaps\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 prepositional phrase}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 . On the other hand, the wording }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 i Eru i or ily\'eb mahalmar e\'e4}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  in Cirion's Oath inverts the order of the verb and the prepositional phrase, placing the verb at the end (much like in a German relative phrase, but in Cirion's Oath
 the verb }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 e\'e4}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  is actually not absolutely final; there is an adverb }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 tennoio}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 "for ever" following it). Carrying the word order used in Cirion's Oath over to the Lord's Prayer would produce *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1taremma i han \'eba \'eba}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , the first }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  being a noun (E\'e4, the universe) and the second a verb "is, exists". Perhaps Cirion's Oath displays the more normal word order, the Prayer using an alternative wording to avoid two }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  in sequence. In a highly inflected language like Quenya, the word order would typically be quite free anyway. It may be noted that the sole relative sentence in Nam\'e1ri\'eb \endash  the words }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
tellumar, yassen tintilar i eleni}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , literally "domes, which-in twinkle the stars" (RGEO:66-67) \endash  has the verb }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 tintilar}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "twinkle" immediately following the relative pronoun }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ya}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "which" (here inflected for plural locative: }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 yassen}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ). This quote was from the "prose version" of Nam\'e1ri\'eb
 in RGEO; the "poetic" version in LotR does not have the noun }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 tellumar}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "domes" immediately in front of the relative pronoun, but still agrees that the }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 verb}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 follows immediately after the relative pronoun. This would be the same word order as in }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1taremma i \'eba}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
... "our Father who is..." It would seem that Quenya does not have a fixed word order in relative sentences, but }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 typically}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  the verb may follow immediately after the relative pronoun, as in the phrases }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1taremma i \'eba}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  and }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 tellumar, yassen tintilar}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 .
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par na aire esselya }{\b\lang2057 \'b7}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 hallowed be thy name,}{\b\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 The word }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 na}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  seems to be an }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 optative}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  particle (that is, a particle signaling that the sentence it occurs in should be taken as a }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 wish}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  rather than a declarative statement), }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 aire}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "holy" (cf. }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 aire Mar\'eda}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  for "holy Mary" in the }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Hail Mary}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  text), }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 esselya}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "thy name" (sc. }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 esse}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "name" + -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 lya}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "thy"). The whole sentence could be interpreted *"be holy thy name" with }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 na}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  as the imperative "be!" (LR:374 lists }{\scaps\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e2}{\fs24\lang2057\super\cgrid0 2}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 - as the stem of the verb "to be" in Quenya), and perhaps this was indeed the construction the early Eldar originally intended, but if this is the case, }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 na}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 later evolved beyond being a mere imperative "be!" In light of the two next examples (see below), I think that in terms of synchronic syntax, it is probably best to interpret }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 aire esselya}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 as a nominal sentence "holy [is] thy name" (we will see several more examples of such sentences in this text), this declarative sentence then being transformed into a wish or a prayer by supplying the particle }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 na}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 : "May your name [be] holy."}{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par aranielya na tuluva }{\b\lang2057 \'b7}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thy kingdom come,}{\b\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 aranielya}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "thy kingdom", sc. #}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 aranie}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "kingdom" + -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 lya}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "thy", }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 na}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  optative particle denoting a wish, }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 tuluva}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "shall come", verb }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 tul}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 - "come" + the future-tense ending -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 uva}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 . Stylistic matters aside, the Quenya text reads literally something like "thy kingdom, wish-that [it] will come". Unlike the standard English text of the prayer, that simply expresses a wish that the kingdom may com
e without touching on time at all, the Quenya version makes it clear that the coming of the Kingdom of God is a }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 future}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  event \endash  as indicated by the future-tense form }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 tuluva}
{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 . (Contrast the aorist tense employed in the translation of "thy will be done" below; this is not a prayer regarding a singular future event, but a prayer that the will of God }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 always}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 be done, irrespective of time.)}{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par na care ind\'f3melya cemende tambe Erumande :
\par }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thy will be done, on earth as [it is] in heaven}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 na}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  wishing-particle, }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 care}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "does", aorist verb (with no explicit subject!), }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ind\'f3lmelya}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "your will" (#}{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ind\'f3me}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "will" + -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 lya}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "thy"), }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 cemende}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 "(as?) on earth". This is a hitherto unknown case or adverbial form. It could have much the same function as the well-known locative in -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 sse}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  (that also occurs in the text before us, in the word }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 l\'famesse}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  below). The basic word is }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 cemen}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "earth", so the ending could be #-}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 de}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (which form it could only have following words ending in -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 l}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  or as here -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 n}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
; otherwise impossible consonant clusters would arise \endash  or, if this suffix were added to words ending in a vowel, an equally impossible intervocalic }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 d}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ). It may be that the ending is actually #-}{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 nde}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , reduced to #-}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 de}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  when added to a word in -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 n}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
. It could also be a kind of "comparative" case, indicating that }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 cemende}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  is being compared to }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Erumande}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  (see below). In earlier "Qenya", an ending -}{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ndon}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  meaning "like" appears; it is possible that -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 nde}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  is a later incarnation of it (see the entry }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 cemende}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 in the Lexical Commentary below for further discussion). }{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [In VT43, the ending -}{\b\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 de}{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  is suggested to be an allomorph of the locative ending -}{\b\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
sse}{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 , or its shorter version -}{\b\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 se}{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 . Tolkien may seem to be toying with a system that has this ending appearing as -}{\b\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 ze}{
\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  or -}{\b\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 de}{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  following certain consonants, like -}{\b\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 n}{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  and -}{\b\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 l}{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
. This phonological development does not agree very well with the system he uses elsewhere, though: }{\b\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 cemen}{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  + -}{\b\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 se}{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  would be expected to yield 
}{\b\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 cemesse}{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  rather than }{\b\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 cemende}{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 .] }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 tambe}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 "as", evidently used when comparing with something not close to the speaker; contrast }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edv'}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  later in the text, apparently meaning "as" when comparing to something that }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 is}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  in the proximity of the speaker (see the Lexical Commentary for further discussion of both words). }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Erumande}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "(as?) in heaven", a most peculiar form apparently including }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Eru}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "God"; see Lexical commentary. It evidently incorporates the same "locative" or "comparative" ending as in }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 cemende}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
, and since the latter is known to correspond to the nominative form }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 cemen}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , the nominative of }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Erumande}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  could likewise be #}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruman}
{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 . Yet since the ending may also be #}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 -nde}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , another possible nominative may be #}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruma}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 . }{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
[VT43 takes it for granted that the simplex is }{\b\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruman}{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 .]}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par \tab This line suggests that Tolkien based his Quenya version of the prayer on the typical English wording rather than the Greek or Latin versions. In the Greek text of Matthew 6:10, the wording used is "as in heaven, so on earth" (}{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 h\'f4s en ouran\'f4i kai epi g\'eas}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ; cf. also Latin }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 sicut in caelo et in terra}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
). The inversion "on earth as in heaven" is however usual in English versions (found already in one Old English translation: }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 on eorthan swa swa on heofenum}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
), and Tolkien is seen to have carried it over into Quenya.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 This line commences with the last attestation of the wishing-particle }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 na}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 in this text, and we can summarize the syntactical rules relating to it as follows: The particle is used to express a wish (or perhaps indeed prayer) about what happens (will happen) to an object, }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 or}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 what a subject does (will do). If the speaker wishes that a subject is to have or receive the qualities denoted by some adjective, the syntax is }{\scaps\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 particle + adjective + subject}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  (}{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 na aire esselya}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , *"wish-that holy [is] thy name" = "hallowed be thy name"). If the speaker wishes that a subject is to }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 do}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  something, the syntax is}{
\scaps\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  subject + particle + finite verb}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  in the appropriate tense: }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Aranielya na tuluva}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
, *"thy kingdom, wish-that [it] will come". If the speaker wants to express what he wishes to be done to an object, the syntax is }{\scaps\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 particle + finite verb + object}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 : }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Na care ind
\'f3melya}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , *"wish-that [one] does thy will". The latter is the most remarkable construction; the subject position is simply left empty. One is reminded of the Ad\'fb
naic system, whereby the passive is rendered by "subject in accusative" (SD:439 \endash  in other words, the "passive" construction basically consists of simply }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 omitting}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  the real
 subject, denoting the agent, from the sentence!) It may be that Quenya regularly employs "subject-less" verbs where English would have an "impersonal" subject like }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 one}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 : hence }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
care}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  = *"one does". (It may be noted that Tolkien sometimes slipped in singular third person pronouns when translating such aorist verbs, e.g. }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 take}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "he fastens" in LR:389 s.v. }{
\scaps\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 tak}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 -, though no explicit pronominal element "he" is present. Perhaps this could also be taken as \endash  or is properly \endash  an impersonal verb: *"one fastens". If so, }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 n
a care ind\'f3melya}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is not really a subject-less construction: rather a somewhat ethereal impersonal subject is inherent in this very form of the verb, though it is only perceived when it is not "overridden" by another, explicit subject.)  In Quenya, it would probably be }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 permissible}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  to slip in an explicit subject in the normal position and say (for instance) *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 na ilquen care ind\'f3melya}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
, "wish that everyone does thy will". This would involve nothing more dramatic than merging the attested patterns }{\scaps\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 subject + particle + finite verb }{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 and }{\scaps\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
particle + finite verb + object }{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 (into }{\scaps\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 subject + particle + finite verb + object}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ). }{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
[VT43 does not consider the possibility of a subject-less construction; }{\b\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 na care ind\'f3melya}{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  is apparently taken as a kind of imperative: "Do thy [own!] will!" rather than "let thy will be done".]}
{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par \'e1men anta s\'edra ilaur\'eba massamma }{\b\lang2057 \'b7}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Give us this day our daily bread,
\par }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1men}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  imperative particle }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  with a dative pronoun #}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 men}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 "to us, for us" directly suffixed (evidently #}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 me}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "we, us" + dative ending -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 n}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ), }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 anta}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  verbal 
stem "give", connecting with the imperative particle in the previous word to produce an imperative "give!" The dative form #}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 men}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  is the indirect object of this phrase, hence "give (to) us". }{
\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edra}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "this day, today" (a somewhat surprising form; we might rather have expected *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edre}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  \endash  see Lexical Commentary). }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
ilaur\'eba}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "daily" (}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 il-aur\'eb-a}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "every-day-ly"), }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 massamma}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "our bread" (#}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 massa}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 "bread" + -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 mma}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  pronominal ending denoting exclusive "our", as in }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1taremma}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  in the first line).
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par ar \'e1men apsene \'facaremmar s\'edv' emme apsenet tien i \'facarer emmen. 
\par }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 and forgive us our trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us.}{\b\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ar}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "and", }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1men}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  imperative particle }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  combined with the dative pronoun #}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
men}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "for us, to us" as above. }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 apsene}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  stem of the verb "forgive", connecting with the 
imperative particle and the suffixed dative pronoun to produce a phrase meaning "forgive us". Notice that what is in English would be the direct object of the verb "forgive" is in Quenya the }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 indirect}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 object instead: In Quenya, the direct object is evidently }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 the matter that is forgiven}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , while the indirect object (the dative object) is the }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 person that is forgiven}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 . This is evident from the next word: }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facaremmar}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "our sins", which is  #}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facare}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "sin, misdeed, trespass" + the ending -}{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 mma}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  for exclusive "our" + the plural ending -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 . (Less probably this could be #}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facar}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 "sin, misdeed, trespass" + a connecting vowel }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  + the other endings; but see }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facaremmar}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  in the Lexical commentary.) }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edv'}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "as", elided form of *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edve}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  (the final vowel }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  dropping out since the next word also begins in }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  \endash  there is however no hard-and-fast rule that such elisions have to occur whenever two similar vowels follow one another, cf. }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 na aire esselya}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  rather than *}{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 na air' esselya}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , but prepositions and particles, being unstressed, may be more susceptible to elision than other words). *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 S\'edve}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 apparently means "as" when the speakers are comparing with something in their own proximity; see note on }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 tambe}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  and *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edve}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  below. }{
\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 emme}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  emphatic pronoun, exclusive "we" (emphatic }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 we}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  to contrast with }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 those who trespass against us}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ). }{
\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 apsenet}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  probably *"forgive them", aorist tense with the pronominal suffix -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 t}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 for "them" as direct object. This is one of only two published examples of a verb receiving one pronominal ending denoting the }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 object}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  only, and the very first example of a }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 finite
}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  verb with such an ending (the other example being an infinitive: }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 karita}{\i\fs24\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "to do }{\fs24\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 it}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
", VT41:13, 17). In all other known examples, verb-forms that include a pronominal suffix denoting the object also have a suffix denoting the }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 subject}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , the latter prec
eding the former. An example involving the same ending -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 t}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "them" as in }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 apsenet}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  is provided by the Cormallen Praise, that has }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
andave laituvalmet}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  for "long shall we praise them". Here the ending -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 t}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "them" is preceded by -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 lme}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 - "we": object and subject respect
ively. }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Emme apsenet}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "we forgive them" may be seen as a reworked form of *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 apsenemmet}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
, the subject being expressed as an independent pronoun instead of a suffix since "we" is to be emphatic, but the ending -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 t}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  for "them" remains suffixed to the verb. }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 tien}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  apparently dative pronoun "(for) them" or "(to) them" (the dative of }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 te}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , see Lexical commentary). This would be the }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 indirect}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 object of the verb "forgive", and since }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 tien}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  is followed by the relative sentence "who trespass against us", it is clear that the dati
ve pronoun denotes the ones that are forgiven. As we have already observed, in Quenya the indirect (dative) object of "forgive" denotes the ones that are forgiven, the direct object the matter that is forgiven: }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1men apsene 
\'facaremmar}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , "forgive }{\fs24\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 us}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  [#}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 men}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , indirect object] }{\fs24\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 our trespasses}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  [}{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facaremmar}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , direct object]". The -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 t}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  suffixed to the verb "forgive" in }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 emme apsene}{\i\fs24\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 t}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  must likewise be the direct object, "we forgive }{\fs24\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 them}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ", but again, this "them" must refer to the things that are forgiven rather than the people 
who are forgiven: the people are referred to by the independent dative object }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 tien}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 instead. Tolkien apparently used the wording *"forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them [that is, trespasses] for the benefit of those [}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 tien}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , dative] who trespass against us". }{
\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  relative pronoun "who", }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facarer}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  verb "trespass" or "sin", literally rather "do misdeeds": aorist tense with the plural ending -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
r}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 . (Based on other examples we would rather expect *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facarir}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , and probably also *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 apsenit}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  rather than }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
apsenet}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  above \endash  see }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 care}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 in the Lexical commentary: Regarding the formation of the aorist, Tolkien may have been in a somewhat unorthodox "phase" when he wrote this text, compared to the system he used both earlier and later.) }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 emmen}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "against us" (exclusive). This is the pronoun }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 emme}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  (attested earlier in the sentence) with the dative ending -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 n}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
, our first example of an emphatic pronoun with a case ending. This is also our first example of the dative being used to denote an indirect object }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 adversely}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  affected by the verbal action, h
ence the English translation "against us" rather than "for us, to us". All previously attested examples of the dative are used to denote indirect objects that }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 benefit}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  from the verbal action, e.g. }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 nin}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "for me" in the sentence }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'ed man i yulma }{\i\fs24\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 nin}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  enquantuva?}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "now who will refill the cup }{
\fs24\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 for me}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ?" in Nam\'e1ri\'eb. (As far as grammar is concerned, }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 tien i \'facarer emmen}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  could probably also be interpreted **"those who trespass }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 for}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  us"; the context must be taken into account when determining precisely how the dative is to be understood.)
\par \tab Again we see Tolkien basing the Quenya version of the prayer on English translations rather than the Greek text of Matthew 6:12, which reads }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 tois opheiletais hem\'f4n}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 = "our debtors" rather than the longer paraphrase "those who trespass (or, sin) against us". This wording is quite typical for English translations.
\par 
\par Note on }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 tambe}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  and *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edve}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 : Both of these words are translated "as, like". Yet they are apparently not interchangeable. In }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
na care ind\'f3melya cemende }{\i\fs24\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 tambe}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  Erumande}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , "thy will be done, on earth }{\fs24\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 as}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 it is in heaven", the word "as" points far away from the speakers (literally all the way to heaven). On the other hand, in the sentence }{\i\fs24\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edv'}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  emme apsenet tien i \'facarer emmen}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , "}{\fs24\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 as}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  we forgive those who trespass against us", the word "as" refers t
o the situation of the speakers themselves. Thus, the distinction apparently has to do with the distance between the speaker and the thing/situation "as" refers to. For instance:
\par 
\par *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Caruvalmes }{\i\fs24\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edve}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  queni sinome oi ac\'e1rier ta, }{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par "We will do it }{\fs24\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 like}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  people in this place have always done that,"
\par *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ar l\'e1 }{\i\fs24\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 tambe}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  carintes i ostosse}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 .
\par "and not }{\fs24\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 like}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  they do it in the city."}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par The first "like" refers to a situation }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 close}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  to the speaker, the other to a situation that is }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 not}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  close to the speaker. Presumably one could use the
 evidently "neutral" word for "as, like", namely }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ve}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , for both }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edv[e]}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  and }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 tambe}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (indeed both forms seem to include }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ve}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , see Lexical Commentary) \endash  but Tolkien apparently built into Quenya the possibility of making some fine distinctions that are not regularly
 expressed in English. Since Quenya is in many ways }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 the}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 language of Tolkien's mythos, the tongue of the High Elves of the Blessed Realm, it is not surprising that he tried to make it rich and full of subtle nuances.
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par \'c1lame tulya \'fasahtienna mal \'e1me etelehta ulcullo : n\'e1sie :}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
\par }{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 (The Quenya text has no initial "and".) }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1lame}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  is the imperative particle }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  with a suffixed negation #}{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 la}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "not" followed by yet another suffix, the now familiar #}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 me}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "us", here occurring without the dative ending -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 n}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 : this is a direct object, not an indirect one. }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 tulya}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  stem of the verb }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 lead}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , which combined with }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1lame}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  forms the imperative phrase "do not lead us". }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'fasahtienna}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "into temptation", clearly #}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'fasahtie}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "temptation" + the a
llative ending -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 nna}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "to, into". }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 mal}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 but}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (wholly different from previously attested words of the same meaning), }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1me}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  imperative particle }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  + suffixed pronoun #}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 me}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "us". }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 etelehta}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  stem of verb "deliver, free", connecting with }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1me}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  to form an imperative phrase }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 de
liver us}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 . }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ulcullo}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 from evil}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , incorporating the ablative ending -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 llo}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 "from". The noun "evil" to which it is attached can be either #}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ulcu}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  or *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ulco}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  with a stem #}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ulcu}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
- (see Lexical Commentary). Conceivably this word could mean "the evil one" (the devil) rather than "evil" as an abstract. The Greek phrase }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 tou ponerou}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 can be translated both ways, and some modern versions do prefer the alternative wording: "Save us from the evil one" (Matthew 6:12 in }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 The Jerusalem Bible}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , which version Tolkien himself translated a 
minor part of: Letters:378). In Ephesians 6:14-16, most translators take }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 tou ponerou}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 as referring to the devil: "Stand your ground...always carrying the shield of faith so that you can use it to put out the burning arrows of the evil one." We cannot be certain what precise meaning Tolkien intended #}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ulcu}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  (or *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ulco}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ) to have, "evil" or "evil one". The shape of the word itself may suggest the latter, but if it is not an abstract, we would probably expect the article }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "the" before it to express "}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 the}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  evil one" \endash  unless it is actually a }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 name}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 of the "Evil One", in which case we would have expected it to be capitalized.
\par \tab Some versions of the prayer slip in a doxology at the end: "For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen" (Matthew 6:13; 
cf. 1 Chronicles 29:11 and Revelation 4:11). However, these words do not occur in some of the oldest Greek manuscripts: Modern Greek master texts (like those prepared by Westcott/Hort, or the Aland edition) typically omit them, as do a number of modern tr
anslations. Of this spurious doxology, Tolkien only included the final "amen!" in his Quenya version of the prayer: }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e1sie}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
, probably literally *"this is [so]" (see Lexical Commentary). Evidently it was a concern of his that the text he translated should be genuine. From a }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 linguistic}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 point of view we may regret the omission of the full doxology, for it would have been interesting to see how Tolkien would have handled the independent possessive pronoun }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 thine}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (would the long-hypothesized form *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 elya}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  have been confirmed?)
\par 
\par Here the syntax relating to the imperative particle }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  may be summarized. The Lord's Prayer provides four examples: }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1men anta}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "give us", }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1men apsene}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "forgive us", }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1me etelehta}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "deliver us" and (with both a negation -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 la}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
- and a pronominal ending -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 me}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  suffixed) }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1lame tulya}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "lead us not". To these examples may be added }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1 hyame}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  for "pray" in Hail Mary (see below). In the latter example we see the imperative particle by itself, without suffixes, as we do in the sentence }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1 vala Manwe}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "may Manwe order it" (
or literally *"do rule Manwe") in WJ:404. The particle also occurs by itself, in the variant (short) form }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , in a sentence from the Cormallen Praise: }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 A laita te, laita te}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , "bless them, bless them".
\par \tab The }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 verb}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  that follows the imperative particle }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  (standing alone or with negations/pronouns  suffixed) will appear as an uninflected stem. }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Anta}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 etelehta}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 tulya}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  are examples of A-stems, or "derived" verbs (which must also be the case with }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 vala}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "rule" in }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1 vala Manwe}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ). On the other hand, }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 apsene}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  and }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 hyame}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  would seem to represent "basic" verbs, the essential component of which is just a naked root with no suffixed verbal ending like -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ta}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  or -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ya}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  (in }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 apsene}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  we may have an element }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 prefixed}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  to the root, but that is irrelevant). Such a verb adds an -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , evidently representing primitive short -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , when the verb appears as an infinitival or uninflected "stem". }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1 hyame}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 "pray!" may be compared to the phrase }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1va kare}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  in WJ:371: "A longer form }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1va}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ...which shows combination with the imperative particle *}{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e2}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , was commonly used as a negative imperative 'Don't!', either used alone or with an uninflected verbal stem, as }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1va kare!}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 " \endash 
 a negative command "don't do it!" (WJ:371). }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Kare}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  here counts as the "uninflected verbal stem" of the verb }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 kar}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
- "make, do", itself representing the naked root }{\scaps\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 kar}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:362). The negation (}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1va}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  instead of }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
) does not affect the syntax; one could certainly scramble the attested examples }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1 hyame}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  and }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1va kare}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  to produce *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1
va hyame}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "don't pray!" and *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1 kare}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "do!" The uninflected verbal stems coincide in form with certain tense-forms: an A-stem like }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 anta}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , as well as the actually infinitival stems }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 hyame}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  and }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 kare}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
, could by their form also be examples of the aorist. However, when preceded by the imperative particle }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  (or its negated forms }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1va}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1la}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ) such a form must be taken as infinitival/uninflected.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
The Quenya versions of the Lord's Prayer and Hail Mary reveal one new thing about the imperative particle: it easily attracts pronominal elements. The pronoun denoting the object of the imperative phrase (in accusative for a dir
ect object or dative for an indirect object) may be }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 directly suffixed}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  to the imperative particle, before the verb follows. Hence we have for instance }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1me etelehta}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "deliver us", }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1men anta}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "give (to) us". Yet the sentence }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 a laita te}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "bless them" in LotR has the pronoun }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 following}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  the verb. We must assume that }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 te}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 "them" could also in this case have been suffixed to the imperative particle, so that "bless them!" would be expressed as *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1te laita}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , "do-them bless!" Conversely, in light of this example from LotR we 
must assume that the pronouns could have been placed }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 after}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  the verb also in the text before us: *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1 anta men}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "give us", *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1
 apsene men}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "forgive us", }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1 etelehta me}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "deliver us", *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1la tulya me}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 "do not lead us". Yet it may be a feature of Quenya grammar that when a short pronoun that functions as a direct or indirect object cannot be }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 suffixed}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 to this verb (which is perhaps always impossible in the case of an indirect/dative object), then the pronoun typically appears }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 before}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  the verb instead \endash  even though the pre
ferred word order is otherwise subject-verb-object rather than subject-object-verb. Compare such French constructions as }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 je t'aime}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
, though French is normally subject-verb-object and not subject-object-verb; the Quenya equivalent can be found in LR:61: }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Inye tye-m\'e9la}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "I love thee" with }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 tye}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "thee" prefixed to the verb rather than following it. Even in Nam\'e1ri\'eb (including the prose version) we have }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'ed man i yulma nin enquantuva?}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 for "who now will refill the cup for me?"; notice that the dative pronoun }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 nin}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  comes 
before the verb, though its equivalent "for me" in the English translation comes after it. It seems that when placed in front of the verb, such short pronouns easily glue themselves to a preceding particle when such is present. In light of the examples fo
und in the text before us, an imperative "refill the cup for me!" would probably be *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1nin enquate i yulma!}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  with }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 nin}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 "for me" directly suffixed to the imperative particle.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 II. HAIL MARY
\par }{\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Aia Mar\'eda quanta Eruanno
\par }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Hail Mary full of grace,}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Aia}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "hail" (later form/alternative spelling of }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 aiya}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ), }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Mar\'eda}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 "Mary" (the "Quenya" form is based on the Latin pronunciation, as is }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Y\'e9sus}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  = "Jesus" later), }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 quanta}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "full", }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruanno}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "of grace" \endash  evidently the genitive of *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruanna}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "grace" or literally *"God-gift". This example shows that "full of" something is rendered as }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 quanta}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  + genitive. This use of the genitive has never been attested before. }{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [Earlier versions of the Quenya Ave Maria here uses the instrumental case instead: VT43:26, 27.]}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par i H\'e9ru as elye }{\b\lang2057 \'b7}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 the Lord is with thee.}{\b\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  article "the", }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 H\'e9ru}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "Lord" (other sources have }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 heru}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  with a short }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ), }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 as}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "with", }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 elye}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "thee" (or "thou", which is the meaning this word has in Nam\'e1ri\'eb
; we know little of what case Quenya prepositions normally govern, accusative or nominative). It will be n
oted that there is no Quenya word corresponding to "is" in the English version. Presumably it would have been possible to slip in such a word (before a prepositional phrase denoting a position it would probably be }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  rather than }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e1}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , hence *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 i H\'e9ru \'eba as elye}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ) \endash  but it is clearly not required. This is a }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
nominal}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  sentence, the word "is" being left out and understood. Such constructions are common enough in the languages of our own world (e.g. Russian and many Semitic tongues), and this construction may be commo
n or even dominant in Eldarin as well. In Hail Mary, this line is the first of three consecutive nominal sentences. Such constructions are not unheard of in material that has been published earlier, either: in LR:47 we have }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
ilya s\'ed maller raikar}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  for *"now all roads [are] bent". }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Vahaiya s\'edn atalante}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 Tolkien himself translated "far away now (is) the Downfallen", the parenthetical "is" clearly indicating that this copula is not directly expressed in Quenya (SD:247). It may be that nominal sentences without an 
explicit copula are normal rather than exceptional in Quenya.
\par \tab As noted above, it would be possible to read }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 aselye}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  (as one word). If so, this is better taken as a preposition }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 as}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "with" + the pronominal ending -}{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 lye}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "thou" (or in this context "thee"), with a connecting vowel -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 - inserted before the ending to avoid an impossible consonant cluster (cf. }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  before another pronominal ending in }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1tar-e-mma}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ). Alternatively, the preposition could be #}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ase}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , the -}{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  being part of it. This would in any case be the first known example of a preposition with a pronominal ending. There are, however, some arguments against reading }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 aselye}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  as one word. For one thing, }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  would then become intervocalic, and intervocalic }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  is normally voiced to }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 z}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , later becoming }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , so that we would have seen **}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 arelye}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  instead. (As long as we do not know anything about the etymology of #}{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 as(e)}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "with", it is of course possible that it could represent earlier *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 a\'fe(e)}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , since }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  from }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'fe}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  in no case became }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 z}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  > }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ; see the entry }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'edsi}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 in the Lexical Commentary below for an example. Yet this seems like an ad hoc theory.) The other argument against the reading }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 aselye}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is that Quenya as we know it does not attach pronominal suffixes to prepositions, though we seem to have only one example to go on: Nam\'e1ri\'eb, including the "prose version" in RGEO:67 where metric considerations are of no concern, reads }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 imb\'eb met}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  for "between us". If independent pronouns were readily replaced by the corresponding pronominal ending following prepositions, we would expect *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 imbemmet}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  (?) instead. }{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [However, VT43 cites examples of Quenya prepositions that do take pronominal endings. The mystery of why }{\b\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  fails to become }{
\b\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  remains, though.]}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par aistana elye im\'edca n\'edsi :
\par }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Blessed art thou among women
\par }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 aistana}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "blessed" (evidently a verb #}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 aista}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 - "bless" + the past participle ending -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 na}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ), }{
\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 elye}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "thou" (emphatic form), }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 im\'edca}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "among", }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'edsi}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  plural of }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'eds}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "woman" (according to all other sources, the plural ought to be }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 nissi}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  instead; see the Lexical Commentary). Just like in the sentence }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 i H\'e9ru as elye}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "the Lord [is] with thee" above, the verb "is" is left out and understood. }{\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par ar aistana i y\'e1ve m\'f3nalyo Y\'e9sus :
\par }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 and blessed is the fruit of thy womb Jesus.}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ar}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "and", }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 aistana}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "blessed" as above, }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "the", }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 y\'e1ve}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 "fruit", }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 m\'f3nalyo}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "of thy womb", which is #}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 m\'f3na}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "womb" + the pronominal ending -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 lya}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 "thy" + the genitive ending -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 o}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "of", that displaces a final -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  (cf. }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Vardo}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  as the genitive of }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Varda}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  in Nam\'e1ri\'eb), }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Y\'e9sus}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "Jesus". Yet again, the verb "is" is understood; there is no copula between }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 aistana}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  and }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 i y\'e1ve}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 . Notice that }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 y\'e1ve}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  receives the article }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 though it is also governed by a genitive that might be thought to determine it sufficiently. Other examples seem to indicate that it is inconsequential to the meaning whether the article is included or not when the noun is also governed by 
a genitive; it is to be considered definite in either case. The phrase }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 i y\'e1ve m\'f3nalyo}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  represents the same pattern as }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 i Equessi R\'familo}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 "the sayings of R\'famil" in WJ:398; the article is included. On the other hand, }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Indis i}{\lang2057 \'b7}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Kiryamo}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "The Mariner's Wife" in UT:8 omits the article before }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 indis}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "wife", but it is still definite because of the following genitive; this does not mean "}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 wife of the mariner". One question remains unanswered: Would it have been permissible to include the article if the genitive had }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 preceded}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 the word it governs (known to be a possible or even preferred word order \endash  see below), or would *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 m\'f3nalyo i y\'e1ve}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 R\'familo i Equessi}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , *}{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 I Kiryamo i Indis}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  be just as wrong as }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 thy womb's the fruit}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 R\'famil's the sayings}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 the Mariner's the Wife}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  in English?
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par Aire Mar\'eda Eruo ontaril
\par }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Holy Mary mother of God,}{\b\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Aire}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "holy", }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Mar\'eda}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "Mary", }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruo}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "God's" (}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Eru}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 + genitive ending -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 o}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ), }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ontaril}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "mother" or more literally *"begetter" (with a feminine ending). Unlike the phrase }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 i y\'e1ve m
\'f3nalyo }{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 above, the genitive here comes }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 before}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  the noun it governs: }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruo ontaril}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is literally "God's mother/begetter" in that order. Above we quoted some of the numerous attested examples of the opposite order, with the genitive }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 following}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 its noun instead. It is interesting to notice that while the "poetic" version of Nam\'e1ri\'eb has }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e1mar aldaron}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  for "the wings of trees" (kenning for leaves), the prose version in RGEO:66 has }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 aldaron r\'e1mar}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  instead. Tolkien moved the genitive from a position }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 following}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  the noun it governs to a position }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 preceding}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  it. The latter is evidently the preferred order in normal prose, though exceptions abound.}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par 
\par \'e1 hyame r\'e1men \'facarindor
\par }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 pray for us sinners
\par }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1 hyame}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "pray", }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  being the imperative particle and }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 hyame}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 being an uninflected verbal stem "pray". The form }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e1men }{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 is one of the most obscure words in this text. It evidently means "for us", for which meaning we would expect to see a dative pronoun #}{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 men}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , attested several times above (incidentally suffixed to the imperative particle }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ). Sure enough, }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e1men}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  may seem to include #}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 men}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , but what does the prefix #}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e1}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
- mean? It seems superfluous to achieve the desired meaning. Conceivably this could be a specialized form of the dative, meaning something like *"on behalf of us", but the precise semantic impact of this word must remain a mystery for now. }{
\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [See the entry }{\b\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e1men}{\fs24\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  in the Etymological analysis for further discussion.] }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facarindor}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "sinners", #}{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facarindo}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "sinner" with the plural ending -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 . The word literally means rather *"evil-doers"; see the Lexical commentary. In UT:317, Tolkien sets out a g
rammatical rule that "in Quenya in the case of two declinable names in apposition only the last is declined". This "last declinable word" rule apparently does }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 not}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 apply when a pronoun and a noun stand in apposition. The dative case is evidently indicated by means of the ending -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 n}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  as the final element of }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e1men}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
, and }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facarindor}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "sinners" (here standing in apposition to the pronoun }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e1men}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 "for us") appears in the nominative rather than the dative plural (which would be *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facarindoin}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , according to the Plotz declension).
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par s\'ed ar l\'famesse ya firuvamme : n\'e1sie :}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 now and in the hour of our death.  Amen.}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'ed}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "now", }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ar}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "and", }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 l\'famesse}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  locative of }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 l\'fame}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 "hour", }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ya}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "which", }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 firuvamme}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  *"we shall die" (}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 fir-uva-mme}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "die-shall-we"). The ending -}{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 mme}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  represents an }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 exclusive}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "we", the n
atural form to use here since the one that is addressed is not included in "we": This is a group ("us sinners") addressing someone }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 outside}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 that group (Mary, among Catholics held to be sinless), not another sinner within the group. \endash  As for }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 l\'famesse ya firuvamme}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
, these Quenya words literally mean *"in [the] hour that we shall die"; Tolkien did not directly translate the English wording "in the hour of our death" (the literal Quenya equivalent of which would have been rather *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 i l\'fa
messe qualmemmo}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ). The construction }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 l\'famesse ya firuvamme}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  may be seen as a shortening of the syntactically "fuller" *}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 l\'famesse }{
\i\fs24\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 yasse}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  firuvamme}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 , "in [the] hour }{\fs24\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 in which}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  we shall die", the relative pronoun }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ya}{
\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  receiving the locative ending as well (}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ya}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  with the plural locative ending -}{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ssen}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  is attested in Nam\'e1ri\'eb in LotR, that has }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 yassen}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  for "wherein" referring to the plural word }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 oromardi}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 "high halls"). But this "full" construction would perhaps be perceived as somewhat cumbersome, the locative ending occurring in two consecutive words, and so }{\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 ya}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  "that, which" is used like English }{
\i\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 that}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0  in a phrase like "the year that we moved" (instead of "the year in which we moved"). \endash  Like the Lord's Prayer, Hail Mary ends in a }{\b\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e1sie}{\fs24\lang2057\cgrid0 
 "amen" or *"so it is".}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 4. Lexical/Etymological Commentary: Discussion of Individual Words}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , imperative particle used in conjunction with an uninflected verbal stem: }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1 hyame}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 pray!}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  The particle has no ready English equivalent; it is simply used in conjunction with a verbal stem to make it clear that this verb is to be taken as an imperative. The sentence }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1 vala Manwe}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 in WJ:404 Tolkien translated "may Manwe order it"; a more literal translation could be *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 do rule Manwe}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (if we make an effort to translate }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as a separate word). This }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0  would represent primitive }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , said to be an "imperat
ive particle...originally independent and variable in place" (WJ:365, 371). As mentioned in the Syntactical Commentary above, the imperative particle occurs in LotR in the variant form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (as a short vowel) as part of the Cormallen Praise: }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 A laita te, laita te}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . This is translated "bless them, bless them" in Letters:308; more literally it is *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 o bless them, bless them}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 . The text before us indicates that short pronouns (accusative or dative) may be suffixed directly to this particle: }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1me}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 do}{\lang2057\cgrid0  [something to]}{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0  us}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1men}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 do}{\lang2057\cgrid0  [something] }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 for us}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ; see separate entry }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1me}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  for further discussion. The particle also appears in a negated form #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1la}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , q.v.
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aia}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , interjection }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 hail}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Only the spelling is new; this interjection is attested in LotR. Frodo "speaking in tongues" in Cirith Ungol cried }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Aiya E\'e4
rendil Elenion Ancalima}{\lang2057\cgrid0  = }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Hail E\'e4rendil, brightest of stars}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (translated in Letters:385). As for the variant spellings, compare primitive }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 w\'e2y\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 envelope}{\lang2057\cgrid0  yielding both }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 vaia}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 vaiya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in Quenya (LR:397 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 way}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
-). Already in his very early notes on "Qenya" phonology, Tolkien mentioned the variation }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aiy}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -/}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ai}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, noting that a word like }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 paiyan}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 ("oration") was "also written }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 paian}{\lang2057\cgrid0 " (}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Parma Eldalamberon}{\lang2057\cgrid0  #12 p. 8). It is interesting to notice that}{\lang2057  PM:363, 364 mentions }{\b\lang2057 M\'e1yar}{\lang2057 
 as an alternative form of }{\b\lang2057 Maiar}{\lang2057  (the lesser spirits of the race of the Valar, cf. MR:340). It seems reasonable to assume that the oldest Quenya form of primitive }{\b\lang2057 w\'e2y\'e2}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 envelope}{
\lang2057  was *}{\b\lang2057 w\'e1ya}{\lang2057  (paralleling }{\b\lang2057 M\'e1yar}{\lang2057 ), later becoming (*}{\b\lang2057 waiya}{\lang2057  >) }{\b\lang2057 vaiya}{\lang2057  and still later }{\b\lang2057 vaia}{\lang2057  (paralleling }{
\b\lang2057 Maiar}{\lang2057 ; at the same stage that had }{\b\lang2057 vaiya}{\lang2057 , the lesser Ainur would presumably be termed *}{\b\lang2057 Maiyar}{\lang2057 ). }{\b\lang2057 Aiya}{\lang2057  and }{\b\lang2057 aia}{\lang2057 
 as variant words for }{\i\lang2057 hail}{\lang2057  may thus simply represent an older and a "modern" form of the same word; the difference in pronunciation is in any case slight, and in the case of }{\b\lang2057 paiyan}{\lang2057  vs. }{\b\lang2057 
paian}{\lang2057  Tolkien seemingly implied that the variation is merely orthographic. (The oldest forms of }{\b\lang2057 aia}{\lang2057  would be appreciably different: archaic Quenya *}{\b\lang2057 \'e1ya}{\lang2057  and primitive Elvish *}{\b\lang2057 
\'e2y\'e2}{\lang2057 .) As for the precise }{\i\lang2057 etymology}{\lang2057  of this word, we cannot be certain what Tolkien intended. The first part of *}{\b\lang2057 \'e2y\'e2}{\lang2057  could somehow be related to the Quenya vocative particle }{
\b\lang2057 a}{\lang2057 , as in Treebeard's greeting to Celeborn and Galadriel: }{\b\lang2057 a vanimar}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 o beautiful ones}{\lang2057  (translated in Letters:308). The ending *-}{\b\lang2057 y\'e2}{\lang2057  is frequentl
y used to derive both adjectives and verbs; perhaps Quenya }{\b\lang2057 ai}{\lang2057 (}{\b\lang2057 y}{\lang2057 )}{\b\lang2057 a}{\lang2057  can also be used as a verb, like English }{\i\lang2057 to hail}{\lang2057 
. It is, however, interesting to notice that a word similar to our suggested oldest Quenya form of }{\b\lang2057 aia}{\lang2057 /}{\b\lang2057 aiya}{\lang2057 , namely *}{\b\lang2057 \'e1ya}{\lang2057 , is actually attested in PM:363: "Quenya }{
\i\lang2057 \'e1ya}{\lang2057  meant...'awe'." This is the same source (indeed the same page) that provides the form }{\b\lang2057 M\'e1yar}{\lang2057  rather than }{\b\lang2057 Maiar}{\lang2057 , so }{\b\lang2057 \'e1ya}{\lang2057  and }{\b\lang2057 M
\'e1yar}{\lang2057  most likely belong to the same stage of Quenya. If }{\b\lang2057 M\'e1yar}{\lang2057  later became }{\b\lang2057 Maiar}{\lang2057 , }{\b\lang2057 \'e1ya}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 awe}{\lang2057  presumably also turned into *}{
\b\lang2057 aia}{\lang2057  - wholly similar to the word for }{\i\lang2057 hail}{\lang2057  used in the text before us. Is it, indeed, the same word, so that we could drop the asterisks? If so, the Quenya interjection }{\b\lang2057 ai}{\lang2057 (}{
\b\lang2057 y}{\lang2057 )}{\b\lang2057 a}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 hail}{\lang2057  actually or originally means }{\i\lang2057 awe}{\lang2057 , and its use as a greeting would 
in origin be an expression of deep respect felt by the speaker for the one that is being greeted. If this is the correct etymology, }{\b\lang2057 aia}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 hail}{\lang2057  does not represent primitive Elvish *}{\b\lang2057 \'e2y\'e2}{
\lang2057  as suggested above, but primitive }{\b\lang2057 g\'e2y\'e2}{\lang2057 , a form given in PM:363. The origin
al meaning was harsher than just "awe"; Tolkien glossed it "terror, great fear". (Tolkien imagined that in Quenya, the meaning was softened because after the regular loss of initial }{\b\lang2057 g}{\lang2057 
-, the word came to be associated with Valarin }{\b\lang2057 ayanu}{\lang2057 - or }{\b\lang2057 ayan\'fbz}{\lang2057 , a spirit of Eru's first creation, which word was adapted to Quenya as }{\b\lang2057 Ainu}{\lang2057 
; see PM:364 and WJ:399. The Valar being the most prominent }{\b\lang2057 Ainur}{\lang2057  in Arda, }{\b\lang2057 \'e1ya}{\lang2057  came to refer especially to the }{\i\lang2057 awe}{\lang2057 
 the Elves felt for these mighty spirits, and the word took on a noble sense.) Primitive }{\b\lang2057 g\'e2y\'e2}{\lang2057  was derived from a Common Eldarin stem }{\scaps\lang2057 gaya}{\lang2057  "awe, dread" (cf. }{\scaps\lang2057 g\'e1yas}{
\lang2057  "fear" in the }{\i\lang2057 Etymologies}{\lang2057 , LR:358; this could be an extended form of }{\scaps\lang2057 gaya}{\lang2057 ).
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aire}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , adjective }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 holy}{\lang2057\cgrid0 : }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 na aire esselya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 may thy name (be) holy}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aire Mar
\'eda}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 holy Mary}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . One's first assumption would be that this is the same element }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aire}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as in Nam\'e1ri\'eb, in the compound }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 airet\'e1ri-l
\'edrinen}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 in...her song, holy and queenly}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (literally rather *"by holy-queen-song"). In the prose version of Nam\'e1ri\'eb, Tolkien rephrased this into }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 l\'edrinen aire-t\'e1rio
}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , rendered }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 song-in holy-queen's}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in his interlinear translation (RGEO:67). Here one cannot avoid getting the impression that }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aire}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is the word for }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 holy}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (and as I shall demonstrate, this is probably what Tolkien originally intended). However, in a post-LotR source this adjective is given as }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aira}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 instead: PM:363. The primitive form is not quoted there, but we can evidently find it in WJ:400: }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 gair\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 awful}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 fearful}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 said to come from the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 gay}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 astound}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 make}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 aghast}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , clearly the same as }{
\scaps\lang2057 gaya}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 awe}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 dread}{\lang2057  in PM:3
63. (The fact that this stem may be glossed both as a noun and a verb should not be allowed to trouble us, since the glosses of a primitive root-word often cannot be "exact": Rather than being a useable word itself, the root is raw-material for actual wor
ds, so the glosses only hint at the general meaning: The glosses }{\lang2057\cgrid0 "astound, make aghast" and "awe, dread" obviously revolve around the same theme.}{\lang2057 ) The phonetic development }{\b\lang2057 gair\'e2}{\lang2057  > }{\b\lang2057 
aira}{\lang2057  is simple enough, and the semantic development from }{\i\lang2057 awful}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 fearful}{\lang2057  to }{\i\lang2057 holy}{\lang2057  is not implausible either, if what is }{\i\lang2057 holy}{\lang2057 
 is that which is "awful" in the true sense of the word: awe-inspiring, object of reverent fear. (In trying to explain why primitive }{\b\lang2057 gair\'e2}{\lang2057  > Quenya }{\b\lang2057 aira}{\lang2057 
 came to acquire a more elevated sense, Tolkien also let the "loremasters" invoke the influence from Valarin }{\b\lang2057 ayanu}{\lang2057 - or }{\b\lang2057 ayan\'fbz}{\lang2057 . See }{\b\lang2057 aia}{\lang2057  above.) In }{\b\lang2057 gair\'e2}{
\lang2057 , we see the relatively well-attested adjectival ending -}{\b\lang2057 r\'e2}{\lang2057  (cf. for instance such a primitive form as }{\b\lang2057 ubr\'e2}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 abundant}{\lang2057  from }{\scaps\lang2057 ub}{\lang2057 - }{
\i\lang2057 abound}{\lang2057 , LR:396, or indeed primitive }{\b\lang2057 gaisr\'e2}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 dreadful}{\lang2057  from }{\scaps\lang2057 g\'e1yas}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 fear}{\lang2057  in LR:358: very similar to }{\b\lang2057 gair
\'e2}{\lang2057  in both form and meaning). Yet all of this may in a way be beside the point, for an ancestral form }{\b\lang2057 gair\'e2}{\lang2057  is only capable of yielding Q }{\b\lang2057 aira}{\lang2057 
, and in the text before us the word appears as }{\b\lang2057 aire}{\lang2057  instead. }{\b\lang2057 Aire}{\lang2057  could of course be the }{\i\lang2057 plural}{\lang2057  form of }{\b\lang2057 aira}{\lang2057  (in such a case representing older *}{
\b\lang2057 airai}{\lang2057 ), but it cannot be plural here, since the nouns it modifies \endash  "thy name" and "Mary" \endash  are both singulars occurring separately. It could also be a }{\i\lang2057 nominal}{\lang2057  form of }{\b\lang2057 aira}{
\lang2057 : "The adjective }{\i\lang2057 aira}{\lang2057  was the nearest equivalent to 'holy', and the noun }{\i\lang2057 air\'eb}{\lang2057  to 'sanctity'. }{\i\lang2057 Air\'eb}{\lang2057 
 was used by the Eldar as a title of address to the Valar and the greater M\'e1yar. Varda would be addressed as }{\i\lang2057 Air\'eb T\'e1ri}{\lang2057 . (Cf. Galadriel's Lament, where
 it is said that the stars trembled at the sound of the holy queen's voice...)" (PM:363-364, reproducing a source no earlier than February 1968, cf. PM:331.) This, then, is how Tolkien now wanted to explain the element }{\b\lang2057 aire}{\lang2057  in }{
\b\lang2057 airet\'e1ri-l\'edrinen}{\lang2057  in Nam\'e1ri\'eb. Yet the text before us, certainly written long before 1968, gives away that this was not his original idea. True, }{\b\lang2057 aire Mar\'eda}{\lang2057  for }{\i\lang2057 holy Mary}{
\lang2057  could be explained as a construction similar to }{\b\lang2057 Air\'eb T\'e1ri}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 Holy Queen}{\lang2057 , or literally *}{\i\lang2057 (your) sanctity/holiness, (the) Queen}{\lang2057 
. If Varda (Elbereth) can be addressed as }{\b\lang2057 Air\'eb}{\lang2057 
 or "Sanctity", we must assume that this title is equally applicable to Mary as she appears in Catholic thought: Indeed Tolkien stated that the good peoples of Middle-earth "may call on a }{\i\lang2057 Vala}{\lang2057  (as }{\i\lang2057 Elbereth}{
\lang2057 ), as a Catholic might on a Saint" (Letters:193, footnote). Yet we cannot explain }{\b\lang2057 na aire esselya}{\lang2057 
 in the same way; assuming that this is literally *"may thy name [be] a sanctity" seems rather far-fetched. The conclusion that Tolkien when writing the texts before us thought of }{\b\lang2057 aire}{\lang2057  as an adjective and }{\i\lang2057 not}{
\lang2057  as a noun may not be literally inescapable, but it is overwhelmingly probable. Originally Tolkien seems to have imagined a different etymology. The past participle }{\b\lang2057 aistana}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 blessed}{\lang2057 
 (see below) may very well be related to }{\b\lang2057 aire}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 holy}{\lang2057 ; if so it gives away that the }{\b\lang2057 r}{\lang2057  of the latter word was originally }{\b\lang2057 s}{\lang2057 : In Quenya, }{\b\lang2057 s}{
\lang2057  in certain positions became voiced to }{\b\lang2057 z}{\lang2057 , in turn becoming }{\b\lang2057 r}{\lang2057 ; however, in front of an unvoiced plosive like }{\b\lang2057 t}{\lang2057  (as in }{\b\lang2057 aistana}{\lang2057 
, q.v.), it could not change. If }{\b\lang2057 aire}{\lang2057  was once *}{\b\lang2057 aize}{\lang2057  < *}{\b\lang2057 aise}{\lang2057 , we may assume an even earlier, primitive form *}{\b\lang2057 gaisi}{\lang2057 
 that would allow us to connect this adjective with }{\b\lang2057 gais}{\lang2057 -, cited in LR:358 as one primitive incarnation of the stem }{\scaps\lang2057 g\'e1yas}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 fear}{\lang2057 . We have already pointed out that this cou
ld be merely a variant of the }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 gay}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 astound}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 make}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 aghast}{\lang2057  or }{\scaps\lang2057 gaya}{\lang2057  }{
\i\lang2057 awe}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 dread}{\lang2057  that appears in later sources (PM:363, WJ:400) \endash  exactly the stem(s) from which Tolkien would later derive the word for "holy". We need not doubt that the primitive adjective ended in -}{
\b\lang2057 i}{\lang2057 ; this is evident from the past tense verb }{\b\lang2057 airit\'e1ne}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 hallowed}{\lang2057 , occurring in the Ms. Tolkien Drawing 91, 41v, dating to ca. 1966 and now at the Bodleian (see }{\i\lang2057 
Vinyar Tengwar}{\lang2057  #32, November 1993, page 7, where Carl F. Hostetter volunteers this information from an unpublished manuscript). This probably represents primitive *}{\b\lang2057 gaisit\'e2-n\'ea}{\lang2057 , the verb *}{\b\lang2057 gaisit\'e2}
{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 hallow}{\lang2057  being constructed from *}{\b\lang2057 gaisi}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 holy}{\lang2057  with the verbal ending -}{\b\lang2057 t\'e2}{\lang2057 , here causative: hence }{\i\lang2057 make holy}{\lang2057  = }{
\i\lang2057 hallow}{\lang2057 . As for the adjectival ending -}{\b\lang2057 i}{\lang2057  in *}{\b\lang2057 gaisi}{\lang2057  (becoming Quenya -}{\b\lang2057 e}{\lang2057  when final), compare primitive }{\b\lang2057 karani}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 red}{
\lang2057  yielding Quenya }{\b\lang2057 karne}{\lang2057  (LR:362 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057 kar\'e1n}{\lang2057 -). If we dare to start speculating }{\i\lang2057 why}{\lang2057  Tolkien eventually decided to change the adjective }{\i\lang2057 holy}{
\lang2057  from }{\b\lang2057 aire}{\lang2057  to }{\b\lang2057 aira}{\lang2057 , the very word }{\b\lang2057 karne}{\lang2057  (}{\b\lang2057 carne}{\lang2057 ) may \endash  perhaps \endash 
 provide a hint. In the first edition of LotR, the Ent Bregalad in a song used the word }{\b\lang2057 carnem\'edri\'eb}{\lang2057 
 of his rowans (LotR Volume 2, Book Three, chapter IV). In Letters:224, Tolkien explained that this word means "with adornment of red jewels", literally rather *}{\i\lang2057 red-jeweled}{\lang2057 . The adjective }{\b\lang2057 carne}{\lang2057 
-, descended from older }{\b\lang2057 karani}{\lang2057 , here appears as a prefix. Yet the change of primitive short -}{\b\lang2057 i}{\lang2057  to -}{\b\lang2057 e}{\lang2057  was only supposed to occur }{\i\lang2057 finally}{\lang2057 
. Where not final, as in a compound, this vowel maintained its original quality. Compare Quenya }{\b\lang2057 varne}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 brown}{\lang2057 , derived from a stem }{\scaps\lang2057 bar\'e1n}{\lang2057 - (just like }{\b\lang2057 karani}{
\lang2057  > Q }{\b\lang2057 carne}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 red}{\lang2057  comes from }{\scaps\lang2057 kar\'e1n}{\lang2057 -) and undoubtedly meant to represent a primitive word *}{\b\lang2057 barani}{\lang2057 : In the case of }{\b\lang2057 varne}{
\lang2057 , Tolkien explicitly noted that this becomes }{\b\lang2057 varni}{\lang2057 - when followed by another element (LR:351). Obviously }{\b\lang2057 carne}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 red}{\lang2057  likewise ought to appear as }{\b\lang2057 carni}{
\lang2057 - in compounds, and hence Tolkien changed the word }{\b\lang2057 carnem\'edri\'eb}{\lang2057  to }{\b\lang2057 carnim\'edri\'eb}{\lang2057  when the revised version of LotR appeared in 1966. With this we finally catch up with our point: if }{
\b\lang2057 carne}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 red}{\lang2057  becomes }{\b\lang2057 carni}{\lang2057 - in compounds (the }{\b\lang2057 i}{\lang2057  of primitive }{\b\lang2057 karani}{\lang2057 
 retaining its original quality when not final), then an adjective }{\b\lang2057 aire}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 holy}{\lang2057  derived from *}{\b\lang2057 gaisi}{\lang2057  likewise ought to manifest as }{\b\lang2057 airi}{\lang2057 - in compounds. }{
\b\lang2057 Airet\'e1ri}{\lang2057  in Nam\'e1ri\'eb "should" have been *}{\b\lang2057 airit\'e1ri}{\lang2057  instead! Yet Tolkien failed to correct this when he emended }{\b\lang2057 carnem\'edri\'eb}{\lang2057  to }{\b\lang2057 carnim\'edri\'eb}{
\lang2057 . If our theory is correct, Tolkien may in the end have felt that he had no choice but to }{\i\lang2057 reinterpret}{\lang2057  the }{\b\lang2057 aire}{\lang2057  of }{\b\lang2057 airet\'e1ri}{\lang2057 . A (singular) Quenya adjective in -}{
\b\lang2057 e}{\lang2057  can only represent a primitive form in -}{\b\lang2057 i}{\lang2057 , and this -}{\b\lang2057 i}{\lang2057 - should be unchanged whenever not final; hence there is simply no way the first element of }{\b\lang2057 airet\'e1ri}{
\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 can}{\lang2057  be an adjective. However, Tolkien readily came up with a new interpretation that would still leave the translation of Nam\'e1ri\'eb in LotR more or less correct: While }{\b\lang2057 \'f3maryo }{\b\ul\lang2057 aire}
{\b\lang2057 t\'e1ri-l\'edrinen}{\lang2057  may be rendered}{\i\lang2057  in the voice of her song, }{\i\ul\lang2057 holy}{\i\lang2057  and queenly}{\lang2057 , it "turned out" that this }{\b\lang2057 aire}{\lang2057  is not the adjective }{\i\lang2057 
holy}{\lang2057  after all. It is "actually" a noun }{\i\lang2057 sanctity}{\lang2057 , formed from the real adjective }{\i\lang2057 holy}{\lang2057 , which is }{\b\lang2057 aira}{\lang2057 
. Thus Tolkien managed to plausibly explain (away) the linguistic inconsistencies, though they would have troubled very few readers! However, his translation of the Lord's Prayer, probably about contemporaneous with the pu
blishing of LotR, gives away that originally }{\b\lang2057 aire}{\lang2057  was precisely what it would seem to be in Nam\'e1ri\'eb: the adjective }{\i\lang2057 holy}{\lang2057 . The alternative explanation must have emerged very late; }{\b\lang2057 airit
\'e1ne}{\lang2057  rather than *}{\b\lang2057 airat\'e1ne}{\lang2057  for }{\i\lang2057 hallowed}{\lang2057  in a late (ca. 1966) manuscript seems to indicate that Tolkien at this point still thought of }{\b\lang2057 aire}{\lang2057 , }{\b\lang2057 airi}{
\lang2057 - as the word for }{\i\lang2057 holy}{\lang2057 . Earlier, he perhaps planned to explain }{\b\lang2057 Airet\'e1ri}{\lang2057  (rather than *}{\b\lang2057 Airit\'e1ri}{\lang2057 ) in Nam\'e1ri\'eb as a form coined on analogy with the simplex }{
\b\lang2057 aire}{\lang2057 . Another solution could be that this is better taken as a loose compound }{\b\lang2057 Aire T\'e1ri}{\lang2057 
 (a two-word spelling is actually used in PM:363), though it "happens" to be written in one word in the text in LotR.
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aistana}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , past participle }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 blessed}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , indicating a verbal stem #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aista}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 bless}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The ending -}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 na}{\lang2057\cgrid0  forming past participles is well attested. Compare for instance the verb }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 car}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - (}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -) }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 make}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 quoted in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:362 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, there in the first person aorist: }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 karin}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ) with its past participle #}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 carna}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 made}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , attested as part of a compound in MR:408. This ending descends from primitive -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
: compare such a primitive "past participle" as }{\b\lang2057 skaln\'e2}{\lang2057  (> Quenya }{\b\lang2057 halda}{\lang2057 ) }{\i\lang2057 hidden}{\lang2057  vs. the stem }{\scaps\lang2057 skal}{\lang2057\super 1}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 hide}{
\lang2057 , LR:386. However, in Quenya the past participle ending also appears in a longer form -}{\b\lang2057 ina}{\lang2057 . Examples like }{\b\lang2057 hastaina}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 marred}{\lang2057 
 (MR:254) would seem to suggest that this longer form would be used in the case of a verb in -}{\b\lang2057 ta}{\lang2057 . Perhaps the past participle of #}{\b\lang2057 aista}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 bless}{\lang2057  appears as }{\b\lang2057 aistana}{
\lang2057  rather than **}{\b\lang2057 aistaina}{\lang2057  because of euphony, the diphthong }{\b\lang2057 ai}{\lang2057  in two concomitant syllables being disliked. \endash  The verb #}{\b\lang2057 aista}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 bless}{\lang2057 
 is not previously attested. It is obviously not to be equated with }{\b\lang2057 aista}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 to dread}{\lang2057  in the }{\i\lang2057 Etymologies}{\lang2057  (LR:358 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057 g\'e1yas}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 fear}{
\lang2057 ), though in both cases we are probably to assume a primitive form *}{\b\lang2057 gaist\'e2}{\lang2057 -. The verb }{\b\lang2057 aista}{\lang2057 - would then include the same stem as in (*}{\b\lang2057 gaisi}{\lang2057  >) }{\b\lang2057 aire}{
\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 holy}{\lang2057  discussed above, though subsequent sound-changes have made the words somewhat divergent in form: intervocalic }{\b\lang2057 s}{\lang2057  is voiced to }{\b\lang2057 z}{\lang2057  and then becomes }{\b\lang2057 r}{
\lang2057  in Noldorin Quenya, but in front of an unvoiced plosive like }{\b\lang2057 t}{\lang2057 , an }{\b\lang2057 s}{\lang2057  remains unchanged (with *}{\b\lang2057 gaist\'e2}{\lang2057 - > Q }{\b\lang2057 aista}{\lang2057 - but *}{\b\lang2057 gaisi
}{\lang2057  > Q }{\b\lang2057 aire}{\lang2057  compare primitive }{\b\lang2057 best\'e2}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 matrimony}{\lang2057  > Q }{\b\lang2057 vesta}{\lang2057  but primitive }{\b\lang2057 bes\'fb}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 married pair }{
\lang2057 > Q }{\b\lang2057 veru}{\lang2057 , LR:352 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057 bes}{\lang2057 -, the latter form arising via *}{\b\lang2057 vezu}{\lang2057 ). As indicated in the discussion of }{\b\lang2057 aire}{\lang2057 
 above, the original meaning of the relevant stem has to do with fear and dread rather than holiness: what is "holy" is in origin perceived as that which is fearful or awe-inspiring. It may be that in a way, the verb }{\b\lang2057 aista}{\lang2057  }{
\i\lang2057 to dread}{\lang2057  in the }{\i\lang2057 Etymologies}{\lang2057  is indeed the same as its homonym }{\i\lang2057 bless}{\lang2057 
 in the text before us: Tolkien simply reinterpreted the semantic development (or rather re-coined an earlier word from much the same elements as before, but then applied them with somewhat different shades of meaning). In }{\b\lang2057 aista}{\lang2057 
- }{\i\lang2057 to dread}{\lang2057 , clearly meant to come from *}{\b\lang2057 gaist\'e2}{\lang2057 -, the verbal ending -}{\b\lang2057 t\'e2}{\lang2057  > -}{\b\lang2057 ta}{\lang2057  adds little to the meaning of the stem }{\scaps\lang2057 g\'e1yas}{
\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 fear}{\lang2057  (if we take this gloss as a verb rather than a noun). Compare a Quenya verb like }{\b\lang2057 onta}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 beget}{\lang2057 , derived from a stem }{\scaps\lang2057 ono}{\lang2057 
- of exactly the same meaning (LR:379; see }{\b\lang2057 ontaril}{\lang2057 ). Yet this ending often has a stronger meaning than simply signaling that "this is a verb". It can be causative (see under }{\b\lang2057 tulya}{\lang2057  regarding primitive }{
\b\lang2057 tult\'e2}{\lang2057 -), but also }{\i\lang2057 declarative}{\lang2057 : Interestingly, this meaning is apparently prominent in another attested word for }{\i\lang2057 bless}{\lang2057 , namely }{\b\lang2057 laita}{\lang2057  (the cry }{
\b\lang2057 a laita, laita te}{\lang2057  in the Cormallen Praise and SD:47 meaning }{\i\lang2057 bless them, bless them}{\lang2057 , Letters:308). The verb }{\b\lang2057 laita}{\lang2057 - would most likely be derived from a stem that must be either }{
\scaps\lang2057 lay}{\lang2057 - or }{\scaps\lang2057 day}{\lang2057 - (since initial primitive }{\b\lang2057 d}{\lang2057 - normally becomes }{\b\lang2057 l}{\lang2057 - in Quenya). We know a base }{\scaps\lang2057 lay}{\lang2057 
- that underlies words for }{\i\lang2057 green}{\lang2057  or }{\i\lang2057 summer}{\lang2057  (Letters:283, cf. QL:52 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057 laya}{\lang2057 ), but this seems a less than ideal candidate as the stem for a verb }{\i\lang2057 bless}{
\lang2057 ; on the other hand, it seems clear that Tolkien in the post-}{\i\lang2057 Etymologies}{\lang2057  period reckoned with a stem *}{\scaps\lang2057 day}{\lang2057 - having to do with }{\i\lang2057 greatness}{\lang2057  (of course unconnected with 
}{\scaps\lang2057 day}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 shadow}{\lang2057  in LR:354): Sindarin }{\b\lang2057 daer}{\lang2057  means }{\i\lang2057 great}{\lang2057  (as in }{\b\lang2057 Lond Daer}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 Great Harbour}{\lang2057 , PM:329, and }
{\b\lang2057 Athrad Daer}{\lang2057 /}{\b\lang2057 Dhaer}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 Great Ford}{\lang2057 , WJ:335/338), and this adjective is probably meant to represent primitive *}{\b\lang2057 dair\'e2}{\lang2057 
 (with the same adjectival ending as in such primitive forms as }{\b\lang2057 gair\'e2}{\lang2057 , }{\b\lang2057 ubr\'e2}{\lang2057 , }{\b\lang2057 gaisr\'e2}{\lang2057 : see under }{\b\lang2057 aire}{\lang2057  above). Likely, Quenya }{\b\lang2057 laita
}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 bless}{\lang2057  is to be referred to a primitive word *}{\b\lang2057 dait\'e2}{\lang2057 -, sc. the same stem *}{\scaps\lang2057 day}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 great}{\lang2057  with the verbal ending -}{\b\lang2057 t\'e2}{
\lang2057 , that would here be }{\i\lang2057 declarative}{\lang2057 : *}{\b\lang2057 Dait\'e2}{\lang2057 - would mean }{\i\lang2057 magnify}{\lang2057 , that can of course mean to literally make big or great, but also }{\i\lang2057 
praise by declaring great}{\lang2057 : When Frodo and Sam were hailed with the cry }{\b\lang2057 laita te}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 bless them}{\lang2057 , the onlookers would literally be encouraging one another to }{\i\lang2057 magnify}{\lang2057 
 them in the sense of }{\i\lang2057 declaring their greatness}{\lang2057 . In the case of the word #}{\b\lang2057 aista}{\lang2057 - in the text before us, that may also be translated }{\i\lang2057 bless}{\lang2057 
, this semantic idea is however derived from another source \endash  but the }{\i\lang2057 ending}{\lang2057  seems to have the same shade of meaning. In the case of *}{\b\lang2057 gaist\'e2}{\lang2057 -, Tolkien evidently imagined that the ending -}{
\b\lang2057 t\'e2}{\lang2057  is again declarative, and since the stem }{\scaps\lang2057 gay(a)}{\lang2057 - or }{\scaps\lang2057 g\'e1yas}{\lang2057 - has to do with fear and dread, the basic meaning would be to }{\i\lang2057 
declare or recognize the fearfulness (awe-inspiring quality > holiness)}{\lang2057  of another: }{\b\lang2057 Aistana elye}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 blessed (= recognized and declared as holy) art thou}{\lang2057 . Contrast the earlier interpretation of *
}{\b\lang2057 gaist\'e2}{\lang2057  in the }{\i\lang2057 Etymologies}{\lang2057 , where the same suffix -}{\b\lang2057 t\'e2}{\lang2057  was simply used as a verb-former with little independent meaning and the descendant Quenya verb }{\b\lang2057 aista}{
\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 to dread}{\lang2057  differed only slightly in meaning from the stem }{\scaps\lang2057 g\'e1yas}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 fear}{\lang2057  itself.}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang2057\cgrid0 \tab #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1la}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 don't}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , only attested with a pronominal suffix -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 me}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 us}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , in the phrase }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1lame tulya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 don't-us lead}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , that is, }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 do not lead us}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (into temptation). See }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1me}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1men}{\lang2057\cgrid0  concerning the pronominal ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 me}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The first element of #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1la}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is the imperative particle }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , q.v. The second element is the negation }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 not}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , clearly identical to the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 la}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 no}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 not}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:367). Another word for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 don't}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , namely }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1va}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, appears in a later source. This word as well incorporates the imperative particle }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , in this case combined with the negation }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 v\'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , "an exclamation or particle ex
pressing the will or wish of the speaker", to be interpreted }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 I will not}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Do not!}{\lang2057\cgrid0  depending on the context (WJ:371). LR:367 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 la}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 - lists }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 l\'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as the Quenya negation }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 no}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 not}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , so #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1la}{\lang2057\cgrid0  could be seen as }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0  + }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 l\'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0  just like }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1va}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0  + }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 v\'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (in polysyllabic words, Quenya cannot normally have a long vowel in the final syllable, hence it is shortened: **}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1l\'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1la}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and **}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1v\'e1}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  > }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1va}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). As for the variation #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1la}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Pater Noster}{\lang2057\cgrid0  vs. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1va}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 in Tolkien's later essay }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Quendi and Eldar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , this is explained by Bill Welden's article }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Negation in Quenya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (VT42:32-34): "Possibly soon after publication of }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 The Lord of the Rings}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ,"  Tolkien decided to drop the negative element }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 al}{\lang2057\cgrid0  / }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 la}{\lang2057\cgrid0  "not" (= the -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 la}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1la}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). Among the new negations replacing it we find }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 b\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as an element having to do with "negative command"; this is the source of -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 va}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  in }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1va}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . For a while, #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1la}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as a negative command }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 don't!}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 was thus a conceptually obsolete form, but since Welden also notes that Tolkien eventually resurrected the negative element }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ala}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , Quenya lexicographers may treat #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1la}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 as a valid word and a synonym of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1va}{\lang2057\cgrid0 .
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1me}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 do}{\lang2057\cgrid0  [something to]}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0  us}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1men}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 do}{\lang2057\cgrid0  [something] }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 for us}{\lang2057\cgrid0 : the imperative particle }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (q.v.) with pronominal endings, the following verb filling out the phrase and telling us what }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 me}{\lang2057\cgrid0 (}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ) is the (in)direct object of. In #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1la}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 do not}{\lang2057\cgrid0  the negation #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 la}{\lang2057\cgrid0  has likewise been directly suffixed to }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , and in }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1lame}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  the same pronominal ending as in }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1me}{\lang2057\cgrid0  occurs; see #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1la}{\lang2057\cgrid0  above. \endash  In this text, the accusative pronoun #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 me}{\lang2057\cgrid0  
}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 us}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (exclusive) and its dative variant #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 men}{\lang2057\cgrid0  only appear suffixed to this imperative particle and its negated form #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1la}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 do not}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . These pronouns were however attested previously, though in slightly different forms. The dual form of #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 me}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , namely }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 met}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, appears in Nam\'e1ri\'eb: this means *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 us (two)}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , referring to Galadriel and Varda (another exclusive form, since Galadriel is not addressing Varda, but is singing }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 about}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 herself and Varda to Frodo, who obviously cannot be included in this "us"). The dative form #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 men}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 (for) us}{\lang2057\cgrid0  was almost attested, so to speak, before. It has long been recog
nized that the word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mel-lumna}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in LR:47, translated }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 us-is-heavy}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (sc. *"is heavy for/to us"), includes an assimilated form of #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 men}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, the dative ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n}{\lang2057\cgrid0  turning into }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 l}{\lang2057\cgrid0  before another }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 l}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (see for instance VT32:8 s.v. }{\b\i\lang2057\cgrid0 men}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
-). For another example of assimilation *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nl}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ll}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , cf. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 N\'famell\'f3t\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Flower of the West}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 in UT:227; this is transparently }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'famen}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 west}{\lang2057\cgrid0  + }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 l\'f3t\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 flower}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The pronoun #}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 me}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 us}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is obviously related to the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mme}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 we}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (in }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 firuvamme}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 ) and the independent emphatic pronoun }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 emme}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0  we}{\lang2057\cgrid0 .
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 anta}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , verb }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 give}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . This word occu
rs already in the Qenya Lexicon (QL:31) as well as in some "Qenya" poems from the early thirties (MC:215, 221). However, this is our first attestation of this verb in an actual text that is more or less "mature" Quenya, though in the meantime this word ha
d also appeared in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . There it was derived from a stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ana}{\scaps\lang2057\super\cgrid0 1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - (LR:348), defined }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 to, towards}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  and suggested to be a stemvowel-prefixed form of the prepositional element }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 na}{\scaps\lang2057\super\cgrid0 1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - of similar meaning (LR:374). The word quoted as the ancestral form of Quenya }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 anta}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - is }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 anta}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 to present}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 give}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
; this would seem to indicate that this primitive verb was simply unchanged in Quenya. However, since Primitive Quendian short -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 was lost at the Common Eldarin stage, we must assume that the oldest form was rather *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ant\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - with a }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 long}{\lang2057\cgrid0  final vowel. The primitive verbal ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 t
\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is well attested, sometimes with a causative meaning (again, see under }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tulya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  regarding primitive }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tult\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
-). Since the meaning of the primitive stem itself has nothing to do with verbs but is prepositional or adverbial, -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 t\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  here literally functions as a verb-former, and the original, basic meaning of *}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ant\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - must be *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 bring }{\lang2057\cgrid0 (something) }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 towards}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (someone else), hence }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 present}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and then }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 give}{\lang2057\cgrid0 .}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 apsene}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , verb }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 forgive}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , not previously attested. Apart from making the "external" observation that this verb may echo English }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 absolve}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 absolution}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , it is difficult to say anything certain about its intended etymology. The first element may somehow be related to #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 apa}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 after}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (as in }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Apan\'f3nar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 the After-born}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , an Elvish name of Mortal Men as the Second-born of Il\'fa
vatar: WJ:387). The semantic relationships must however remain vague, all the more so when the element #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 sen}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is wholly obscure. }{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [According to VT43:18, Tolkien derived }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
apsene}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  from }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 sen}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  "let loose, free, let go" supplied with a somewhat obscure prefix }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 aba}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 -, becoming }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 ap}{
\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 - when the syncope brought }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 b}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  into contact with }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 p}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 .]}{\lang2057\cgrid0  #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Apsen}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 forgive}{\lang2057\cgrid0  would most likely behave as a "basic" verb or consonant stem, so that the "uninflected stem" (here used in an infinitival sense) is }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 apsene}{\lang2057\cgrid0  for older *}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 apseni}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . According to the system Tolkien used elsewhere, this would become }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 apseni}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - when any ending is added. However, in the text before us we also have the suffixed variant }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 apsenet}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , not as we might expect *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 apsenit}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . It seems that when writing this text, Tolkien's evolution of his languages was in a "phase" where the variation -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e
}{\lang2057\cgrid0  vs. -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - did not take place, though he had used this system before and later returned to it; see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 care}{\lang2057\cgrid0  for a fuller discussion of this peculiarity. \endash 
 The ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 t}{\lang2057\cgrid0  seen in }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 apsenet}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is apparently the same pronominal suffix -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 t}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 them}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as in }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 laituvalmet}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 we shall praise them}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in the Cormallen Praise. The whole phrase }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 emme apsenet}{\lang2057\cgrid0  thus means }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 we forgive them}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  \endash  sc. other people's sins/trespasses, not the offenders themselves, for they are apparently denoted by the dative pronoun }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tien}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 instead: As we argued above, the direct object (accusative object) of #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 apsen}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 forgive}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is the matter that is forgiven, while the indirect object (dative object) is the person(s) forgiven. The object ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 t}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 them}{\lang2057\cgrid0  ma
y be a shortened and suffixed form of the independent accusative pronoun }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 te}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 them}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , concerning which see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tien}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. It may also be related to the pronominal ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nte}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 they}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (UT:317 cf. 305), which could be a nasal-infixed version of -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 t}{\lang2057\cgrid0 .
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , conjunction }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 and}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , well known from Nam\'e1ri\'eb and other sources. The }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Silmarillion}{\lang2057\cgrid0  Appendix, entry }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ar}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 -, defines this element as }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 beside}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 outside}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and adds that this is the origin of "Quenya }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 ar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  'and', Sindarin }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ". A similar explanation is given in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:349 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ar}{\scaps\lang2057\super\cgrid0 2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -), an
d this may well be Christopher Tolkien's source in this case. However, this entry in Etym. says nothing about the Sindarin (or Noldorin) conjunction; only Quenya }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is mentioned. Normally, we would expect a simple stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  to become }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  both in Quenya and Sindarin, not }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 in the latter. Indeed the Sindarin of the King's Letter has }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  instead of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as the conjunction }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 and}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (SD:128-129); however, }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is found in LotR (the Cormallen Praise includes the words }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Daur a Berhael}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Frodo and Sam}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). The King's Letter, showing }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  instead of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , was never published during Tolkien's lifetime, so he would not be "bound" by it. Besides the }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 of the Cormallen Praise, a later source also has }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ah}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ; MR:304 gives }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Finrod ah Andreth}{\lang2057\cgrid0  for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Finrod and Andreth}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. This reproduces a post-LotR source, so this }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ah}{\lang2057\cgrid0  Tolkien must have intended to be "compatible" with }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in the already published LotR: It would seem that }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 a}
{\lang2057\cgrid0  manifests as }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ah}{\lang2057\cgrid0  when the next word begins in a vowel, or at least in }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -. These examples from Sindarin seem to suggest that Tolkien now imagine
d the primitive stem yielding the conjunction to be *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 as }{\lang2057\cgrid0 rather than }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , for while the latter should have yielded }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 both in Quenya and Sindarin, the former can indeed produce Quenya (*}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 az}{\lang2057\cgrid0  >) }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and Sindarin }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{\lang2057\cgrid0  with a side-form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ah}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  that is used before vowels. Compare the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 os}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 round}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 about}{\lang2057\cgrid0  producing Noldorin/Sindarin }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 o}
{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 about}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 concerning}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , with "}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 h}{\lang2057\cgrid0  before vowel, as }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 o Hedhil}{\lang2057\cgrid0  concerning Elves [}{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Edhil}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ]" (LR:379). The }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 h}{\lang2057\cgrid0  that turns up before vowels is a remnant of the }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0  that the original stem ended in. Same for Sindarin }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ah}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 and}{\lang2057\cgrid0  from *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 as}{\lang2057\cgrid0 : when the next word began in a consonant, }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 h}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 was almost inaudible and disappeared (*}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ah Berhael}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 a Berhael}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
), but before a vowel it survived. The text before us provides new possible evidence supporting the notion that in the post-LotR period, the conjunction }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 and}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is to be derived from a stem *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 as}
{\lang2057\cgrid0  rather than }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 : The preposition }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 as}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 with}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, here attested for the first time, could plausibly be related to the word for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 and}{\lang2057\cgrid0 .  See }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 as}{\lang2057\cgrid0  for further discussion. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Ar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 as the Sindarin word for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 and}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in the King's Letter may reflect the earlier concept of the stem being }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  \endash 
 evidently rejected shortly after the Letter was written, but before LotR was published.
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aranielya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , noun with pronominal ending: }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thy}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 kingdom}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Regarding the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thy}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 esselya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Aranie}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 kingdom}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is a hitherto unknown word, but obviously related to }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aran}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 king}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The latter is undoubtedly to be referred to the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ara}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 noble}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (PM:363, cf. the entry }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 ar(a)}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Silmarillion}{\lang2057\cgrid0  Appendix); }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aran}{\lang2057\cgrid0  could reflect an "extended" form *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 aran}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 . Alternatively, }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aran}{\lang2057\cgrid0  could simply represent a primitive form derived from }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ara}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - by adding a masculine ending, like *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 arano}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 . (A quite different etymology for the words for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 king}{\lang2057\cgrid0  was set out in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , where }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aran}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is the Noldorin form only, corresponding to Quenya }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 haran}{\lang2057\cgrid0 : See LR:360. However, }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aran}{\lang2057\cgrid0  later became the word for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 king}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 in Quenya and Noldorin/Sindarin alike.) The word #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aranie}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 kingdom}{\lang2057\cgrid0  includes what is normally an abstract ending. The ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ie}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (-}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ) can be gerundial or infinitival (see UT:317, commenting on }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 en-yali\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ), or it can correspond to English abstract endings like -}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 ness}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , e.g. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 verie}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 boldness}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:352 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ber}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -). If I had been presented with the word #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aranie}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  with no context or gloss, my best guess would probably have been that it means *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 kingship}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . When it is used for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 kingdom}{\lang2057\cgrid0  it may properly refer to the abstract }
{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 reign}{\lang2057\cgrid0  of a king rather than to his }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 realm}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 as a physical place. However, precisely what is meant by Biblical references to "the Kingdom of God" is a matter for theologians rather than linguists. In the original Greek texts (Matthew 6:10, Luke 11:2), the word translated "kingdom" appears as }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 basileia}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ; this is also properly an abstract, and Tolkien may simply have carried its etymology over into Quenya (Greek }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 basileus}{\lang2057\cgrid0  : }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 basileia}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 king : kingdom}{\lang2057\cgrid0  = Quenya }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aran}{\lang2057\cgrid0  : #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aranie}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). In their }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , Arndt and Gingrich define }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 basileia}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as "}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 kingship}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 royal power}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 royal rule}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 kingdom}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ... }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 kingdom}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , i.e., the territory ruled over by a king... }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 3}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . esp. }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 the royal reign}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 kingdom}{\lang2057\cgrid0  of God, a chiefly eschatological concept." When coining the word #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aranie}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  for Quenya, Tolkien may have intended it to cover about the same shades of meaning. As for the meaning "the territory ruled over by a king", it is interesting to notice that the normally abstract ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ie}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  also appears in #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'f3rie}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 country}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (compounded and inflected in Nam\'e1ri\'eb: }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 sindan\'f3riello}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
out of a grey country}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). The stem is obviously }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ndor}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - as in the more usual word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'f3re}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 land}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:376, cf. WJ:413).

\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 as}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , preposition }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 with}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . As we argued in the entry }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  above, it seems that Tolkien eventually decided that }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ar}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 and}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is to be derived from a stem *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 as}{\lang2057\cgrid0  rather than }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as in earlier sources; the Sindarin cognates }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ah}{\lang2057\cgrid0  suggest this. The conjunction }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 and}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and the preposition }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 with}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 could descend from the same stem; the semantic gap between them is not too wide for this to be plausible. All that remains to be explained is why the }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0  of *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 as}{\lang2057\cgrid0  becomes }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 and}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , but stays }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 as}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 with}
{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The development }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 z}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is a well-known phenomenon in Quenya, but Tolkien seems to hav
e entertained various ideas about what precise environment triggers this development. In the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0  normally becomes (}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 z}{\lang2057\cgrid0  >) }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\lang2057\cgrid0  if it }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 follows}{\lang2057\cgrid0  a vowel and there is no }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 unvoiced}{\lang2057\cgrid0  consonant following it. Hence we have primitive }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 besn\'f4}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 husband}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > Q }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 verno}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:352 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 bes}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -), and the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 \'f3los}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
- produces Q }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 olor}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 dream}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:379). In this scenario, Quenya }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 and}{\lang2057\cgrid0  could come from primitive *}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 as}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , while Q }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 as}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 with}{\lang2057\cgrid0  would have to represent a form where the }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 was originally followed by another, unvoiced consonant so that it could not be voiced to }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 z}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (later > }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). Probably this consonant would simply be another }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s
}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ; double }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ss}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is common and cannot become voiced (e.g. primitive }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 bess\'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > Q }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 vesse}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , LR:352 s.v. }{
\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 bes}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -; a form **}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 vezze}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > **}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 verre}{\lang2057\cgrid0  did not arise even though the group }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ss}{\lang2057\cgrid0  immediat
ely followed a vowel). }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 As}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 with}{\lang2057\cgrid0  could then represent earlier *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 assa}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (or conceivably *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 asse}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or *}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 asso}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ), later shortened to }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 as}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Compare }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nisse}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 woman}{\lang2057\cgrid0  having the shorter form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
nis}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , LR:375 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ndis}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -: Quenya does not permit double consonants finally, so when the final vowel is omitted, }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ss}{\lang2057\cgrid0  had to be simplified to }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . \endash  However, Tolkien later decided that for }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0  to be voiced to }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 z}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (in turn becoming }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
), it is not enough that it }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 follows}{\lang2057\cgrid0  a vowel; it has to be }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 intervocalic}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , a second vowel following }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 after}{\lang2057\cgrid0  it as well (presumably
 a voiced consonant following would also do the trick, so that we would still see primitive }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 besn\'f4}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > Q }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 verno}{\lang2057\cgrid0  rather than **}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 vesno}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
). Above we quoted }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 olor}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 dream}{\lang2057\cgrid0  from the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 \'f3los}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as evidence for the change }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . A later source (UT:396) similarly quotes the stem as }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 olo-s}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , but now the Quenya word for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 dream}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is given as }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
olos}{\lang2057\cgrid0  with the final }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0  unchanged, and only in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 plural}{\lang2057\cgrid0  does the change }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 z}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  > }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\lang2057\cgrid0  occur: The plural form is cited as }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 olozi}{\lang2057\cgrid0 /}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 olori}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Here the original }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 was intervocalic because of the plural ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\lang2057\cgrid0  that followed it. According to this new system (final -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0  being unchanged) it would be possible to derive }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 as}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 with}{\lang2057\cgrid0  directly from primitive *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 as}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Now it is rather }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 and}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  that is the mysterious word; since the change to }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\lang2057\cgrid0  has occurred, the original }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0  must he
re have been intervocalic at an earlier stage. Perhaps we are to assume that }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  < *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 az}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is shortened from *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aza}{\lang2057\cgrid0  < *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
asa}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ? If so, the Quenya preposition }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ara}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 outside}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 beside}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 could be re-explained as the same word with the final vowel intact (this vowel persisting when the word was used as a preposition, but disappearing when it was used as a conjunction and shortened).
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1taremma}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , noun with pronominal ending: }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 our Father}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Concerning the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mma}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 our}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (here following a connecting vowel -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - to avoid an impossible consonant cluster) see separate entry. The word for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 father}{\lang2057\cgrid0  would here seem to be #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1tar}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 ; sources both earlier and later than this text have }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 atar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  with a short initial vowel instead (QL:33, LR:349 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ata}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
-, WJ:402). Conceivably the vocative particle }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (concerning which see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aia}{\lang2057\cgrid0  above) is included here: *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 a Ataremma}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
o Father of us}{\lang2057\cgrid0  being contracted to }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1taremma}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . But if so, the integrated particle cannot be obligatory: The word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 atarinya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 "my father" in LR:70 is another vocative (Herendil talking to his father Elendil), even with a pronominal ending as in }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1taremma}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , but this seemingly completely parallel example still does not show #}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1tar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - with a long vowel. Of course, this is a human son talking to a human father; it could be that #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1tar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  with a lengthened vowel is rather a special }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
strengthened}{\lang2057\cgrid0  form used when the title }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Father}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is applied to God. If so it may parallel }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 H\'e9ru}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Lord}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 in the Hail Mary-text; this word elsewhere appears as }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 heru}{\lang2057\cgrid0  with a short }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . \endash  The word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 atar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 father}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , as it appears elsewhere, is in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0  derived from a stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ata}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - that is likewise defined }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 father}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (LR:349). The primitive form (one of the few ancestral forms that are explicitly identified as "PQ", Primitive Quendian) is also said to be }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 atar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , which Tolkien at this stage probably thought of as represe
nting simply an extended form of the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ata}{\lang2057\cgrid0  itself (*}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ata-r}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). This, according to Etym, produced Quenya }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 atar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  pl. }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 atari}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Yet the plural #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 at\'e1ri}{\lang2057\cgrid0  occurs as part of the compound }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Atanat\'e1ri}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Fathers of Men}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 which is attested several places, such as WJ:39 (also genitive plural }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Atanat\'e1rion}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in WJ:175). Tolkien repeatedly changed his mind about the precise shape of this word; the variants }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
Atanatardi}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Atanatarni}{\lang2057\cgrid0  are also found (WJ:174, 166/174). If }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 atar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 father}{\lang2057\cgrid0  was to have the stem #}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 at\'e1r}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - this would require a primitive form *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 at\'e2r}{\lang2057\cgrid0 (-) with or without some short final vowel (cf. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Anar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 sun}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  being derived from primitive }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 an\'e2r}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , LR:348 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 an\'e1r}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, and therefore having the plural form #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 an\'e1ri}{\lang2057\cgrid0  
\endash  attested as part of a compound in PM:126 \endash  instead of **}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 anari}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). The stem-forms #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 atard}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - and #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 atarn}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
- that Tolkien experimented with elsewhere (the first of which is hinted at already in the Qenya Lexicon, QL:33) would likewise require primitive forms including the "extra" consonant, probably *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 atardo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and *}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 atarno}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , respectively. Compare Quenya }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 halatir}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 kingsfisher}{\lang2057\cgrid0  becoming }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 halatirn}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
- before endings because the word descends from Primitive Quendian }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 khalatirno}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:394 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 tir}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -). Yet in the text before us, Tolkien wrote neither *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 At
\'e1remma}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Atardemma}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , nor *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Atarnemma}{\lang2057\cgrid0  when translating }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 our Father}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , so this 
version of the Lord's Prayer cannot be contemporaneous with any of these other experiments. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1taremma}{\lang2057\cgrid0  itself may rather represent yet another experiment with the precise form and behavior of the Quenya word for }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 father}{\lang2057\cgrid0 .
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 care}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , verb }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 do}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 make}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0  lists a stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kar}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 make}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 do}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 make}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 build}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 construct}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (LR:362). A Quenya verb }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 karin}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 I make}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 build}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is quoted; the same verb (in plural form) occurs in WJ:391, in the phrase }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i }{\b\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 karir}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0  quettar \'f3mainen}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 those who }{\i\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 make}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0  words with voices}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. (The difference in spelling, }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - rather than }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 car}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, is of no importance; this persistent inconsistency is found throughout Tolkien's post-LotR material, and in theory both }
{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 c}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 k}{\lang2057\cgrid0  represent the Tengwa }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 calma}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in the "original manuscripts".) The form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 karir}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 carir}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ) exemplifies the plural form of the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 aorist}{\lang2057\cgrid0  tense, in this case used to denote a "timeless truth". }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Car}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
- is an example of a so-called }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 basic}{\lang2057\cgrid0  verb, formed directly from a root (in this case }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -) without adding any ending (like the very frequent verbal endings -}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ta}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). In the primitive language, basic verbs could receive the ending *-}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 associated with the aorist (though whether this ending actually }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 forms}{\lang2057\cgrid0  the aorist, or it is just a kind of stopgap and the mere }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 absence}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 of another ending indicates that the verb is to be understood as an aorist, is not entirely clear). In Quenya, final short *-}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in the primitive language came out as -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (cf. for instance }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 are}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 day}{\lang2057\cgrid0  from primitive }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ari}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , LR:349 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ar}{\lang2057\super\cgrid0 1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
-). The primitive aorist *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kari}{\lang2057\cgrid0  likewise became }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 care}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as in the text before us, but if one adds any ending so that *-}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is not final, it retains its original quality: hence plural }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 karir}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 carir}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ) rather than *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 karer}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. As for semantics, the difference between aorist }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 care}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 cari}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - and the continuative/"present" tense *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 c\'e1ra}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 may perhaps be compared to the distinction between English }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 does}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as opposed to }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 is doing}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (or }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 makes}{\lang2057\cgrid0  vs. }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 is making}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 ). If we have correctly interpreted the sentence }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 na }{\b\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 care}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0  ind\'f3melya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as a subject-less construction *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 wish that [one] }{
\i\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 does}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0  thy will}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , it becomes clear why the aorist is used here: Much as in the phrase }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i karir quettar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, where the idea is that the Elves (always, permanently, generally) make words, the idea is here that God's will should (always) be done. The aorist denotes an "indefinite" action, unlimited or unmarked as to time. On the other hand, *}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 na c\'e1ra ind\'f3melya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  with the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 continuative}{\lang2057\cgrid0  form of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 car}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
- would perhaps rather be a prayer for a specific situation, expressing a wish that God's will }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 is being done}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in one particular matter. \endash  Not all of the aorist forms in the text before us b
ehave quite like we would expect from other examples. Peculiarly, the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0  does not seem to become -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
- when an ending is added. One example of a "well-behaved" aorist has already been quoted several times: The late source reproduced in WJ:391 (ca. 1960) indicates that the plural aorist of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 car}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - is }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 carir}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (there spelt }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 karir}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
). This agrees with much earlier material, far predating the text before us. Yet in the Lord's Prayer, where what is essentially the same verb occurs with a prefix, we find the form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facarer}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (q.v.) Why not *}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facarir}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ? Likewise, }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 apsenet}{\lang2057\cgrid0  "[we] forgive them", probably another aorist, might be expected to appear as *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 apsenit}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 instead; because of the suffix -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 t}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 them}{\lang2057\cgrid0  the original ending *-}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is not final and therefore should not change to -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e
}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Yet these examples are not unique. In }{\lang2057 SD:290, reproducing a source from ca. 1945-46,}{\lang2057\cgrid0  we have the strange form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ettuler}{\lang2057\cgrid0  for *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 come forth}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 . Again we might expect *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ettulir}{\lang2057\cgrid0  instead, according to the system Tolkien had used in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (of ca. 1935+; LR:395 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 tul}
{\lang2057\cgrid0 - has }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tulin}{\lang2057\cgrid0  rather than *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tulen}{\lang2057\cgrid0  for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 I come}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ) and the early LotR drafts (cf. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 sile}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  vs. pl. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 silir}{\lang2057\cgrid0  rather than *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 siler}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in RS:324). The published LotR contains no example of an aorist, but interestingly, the forms }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 carnem
\'edri\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 red-jeweled}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 airet\'e1ri}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 holy-queen}{\lang2057\cgrid0  tha
t do occur in this work seem to display the same phonological oddity: The }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0  of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 carne}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aire }{\lang2057\cgrid0 represents primitive }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (ancestral forms }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 karani}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 red}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 gaisi}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 holy}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
), and where it is not final it "ought" to remain }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . These examples, already discussed in the entry }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aire}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 above, should evidently not be seen as casual "mistakes" made by Tolkien. Rather it seems that in the latter half of the forties and in the early fifties, his evolution of Quenya was in a phase where the original quality of -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  descended from primitive short -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\lang2057\cgrid0  was nowhere preserved. Perhaps he imagined that extensive analogical leveling had taken place, so that though original -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 "properly" became -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0  only when final, the new quality of the vowel was eventually introduced also where it was }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 not}{\lang2057\cgrid0  final. Hence }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 carir}{\lang2057\cgrid0  
}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 make}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as the pl. aorist of the verb }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 car}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - was changed to #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 carer}{\lang2057\cgrid0  because of analogy with }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 care}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 makes}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (itself < *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kari}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). But it would seem that Tolkien later (not later than 1959-60) changed his mind yet again and reestablished the earlier system, since the aorist }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 karir}{\lang2057\cgrid0 /}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 carir}{\lang2057\cgrid0  rather than **}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 karer}{\lang2057\cgrid0  reappears in a source dating from about 1960 (WJ:391). Likewise Tolkien changed }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
carnem\'edri\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  to }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 carnim\'edri\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in the revised edition of LotR (1966). }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Airet\'e1re}{\lang2057\cgrid0  was kept in this form and not altered to *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Airit
\'e1ri}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , but as we have already discussed, the initial element was reinterpreted to mean }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 sanctity}{\lang2057\cgrid0  rather than }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 holy}{\lang2057\cgrid0 .
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 cemende}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , inflected noun: }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 (as?) on earth}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Silmarillion}{\lang2057\cgrid0  Appendix has an entry "}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 kemen}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 'earth' in }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Kement\'e1ri}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ; a Quenya word referring to the earth as a flat floor beneath }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 menel}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , the heavens". In the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kem}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - is defined }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 soil}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 earth}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , yielding the Quenya words "}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 k\'e9n}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (}{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 kemen}{\lang2057\cgrid0 )" (LR:363). This probably does not mean that }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 k\'e9n}{\lang2057\cgrid0  has an alternative form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kemen}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . When Etym. was written, the Quenya genitive
 ending was -(}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0 )}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , only later changed to -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 o}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , q.v. In some cases the words in -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 en}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 are explicitly identified as genitive singulars; for instance, }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ailin}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 pool}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 lake}{\lang2057\cgrid0  has the "g.sg." }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ailinen}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:329 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ay}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -). As for the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kem}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, Tolkien probably meant the Primitive Quendian word for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 soil}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 earth}{\lang2057\cgrid0  to be *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 keme}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , producing Common Eldarin *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 k\'eam}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (with endings *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kem}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -). In Quenya *}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 k\'eam}{\lang2057\cgrid0  became }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 k\'e9n}{\lang2057\cgrid0  because High-Elven did not permit final -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 m}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, so that it had to be changed to the closest "permissible" sound, namely -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Yet Quenya allowed }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 medial}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 m}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, so in this position the consonant remained unchanged; compare the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 talam}{\lang2057\cgrid0  producing Q }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 talan}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 floor}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , plural }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 talami}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:390). Hence in Etym. the word for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 earth}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 k\'e9n}{\lang2057\cgrid0  with a genitive singular }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kemen}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. As mentioned above, Tolkien later changed the genitive ending to -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 o}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , so we would expect }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kemen}{\lang2057\cgrid0  to become *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kemo}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . However, the genitive 
}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kemen}{\lang2057\cgrid0  appeared in the narratives as part of Yavanna's title }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Kement\'e1ri}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Queen of the Earth}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , literally *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
Earth's-Queen}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Perhaps Tolkien was unwilling to change this to *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Kemot\'e1ri}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . This may be the reason why he reinterpreted }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kemen}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, making it the nominative form rather than the genitive; this would require nothing more dramatic than postulating an "extended" stem *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kemen}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - (formed by means of }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 \'f3mataina}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , sc. reduplication of the stem-vowel [WJ:417], and a suffixed -}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 n}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). Hence }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Kement\'e1ri}{\lang2057\cgrid0  could stand and still be translated }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
Queen of the Earth}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ; the literal meaning had only changed from *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Earth's-Queen}{\lang2057\cgrid0  to *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Earth-Queen}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , with minimal semantic impact. \endash  }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
Kemen}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 cemen}{\lang2057\cgrid0  here appears in the strange inflected form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 cemende}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . This might seem to be a }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 locative}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 form of some kind, though it differs from the normal, well-attested locative in -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 sse}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (that also occurs in this text; see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 l\'famesse}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). It is unclear whether the ending is -}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 de}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or longer -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nde}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (if the latter, it is here simplified to -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 de}{\lang2057\cgrid0  since the word already ended in -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
); see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Erumande}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . If the case in -(}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n}{\lang2057\cgrid0 )}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 de}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is not a locative, it must be some kind of "comparative" case, indicating that }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 cemende}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Erumande}{\lang2057\cgrid0  are being compared to one another ("on earth }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 as}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in heaven). It is interesting to notice that an ending -}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ndon}{\lang2057\cgrid0  signifying }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 as}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 like}{\lang2057\cgrid0  occurs in some "Qenya" poems from the early thirties: }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 wilwarindon}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 as a butterfly}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 taurelasselindon }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 like leaves of forests}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (MC:213-215; compare }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 wilwarin}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 butterfly
}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 taure-lasseli}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 forest}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 leaves}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). It could be that -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nde}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 in the text before us is a later variant of this early -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ndon}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . }{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [In VT43, }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 cemende}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  is interpreted as }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 cemen}{
\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  + -}{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 se}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 , the latter element being a short locative ending which turns into -}{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 ze}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  > -}{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 de}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
 following }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 n}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 . As I point out elsewhere, this development seems pretty ad hoc; normally }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 ns}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  would be expected to turn into a double }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 ss}{
\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 , not }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 nd}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 .]}{\lang2057 
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , primarily a verb }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 is}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 exists}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (UT:305/317, VT39:7), also imperative }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 be!}{\lang2057\cgrid0  Notice that }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is stronger than the simple copula }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , though both may be translated "is". The form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is also used as a noun (then more commonly spelt }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 E\'e4}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ), within Tolkien's mythos a name of the universe that came into being when Il\'fa
vatar granted independent existence to the Music of the Ainur. However, in the text before us the word is apparently used to translate }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 heaven}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (unless, as we suggested above, }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i \'eba han \'eba}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  actually means *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 who is above the universe}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). The verb }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is the basic word here, since its application as a noun is secondary: "The Elves called the Wo
rld, the Universe, E\'e4 \endash  It is" (footnote in Letters:284). "This world, or Universe, [the Creator] calls }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 E\'e4}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, an Elvish word that means 'It is' or 'Let it Be' " (MR:330). As for the primitive form of this word, strong hints are provided by what Tolkien wrote in }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Quendi and Eldar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (VT39:6-7): "The former presence of intervocalic }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 \'f1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , later lost in Quenya, could be detected by consideration of the relations between }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 t\'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0  'indicates' and...}{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 tengwe}{\lang2057\cgrid0  'sign', and comparison with }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0  'exists' beside }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 engwe}{\lang2057\cgrid0  'thing'." }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Tengwe}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 sign}{\lang2057\cgrid0  represents primitive\~}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 te\'f1-w\'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 sign}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 token}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (VT39:17), the letter }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
\'f1}{\lang2057\cgrid0  denoting "ng" as in English "king" (LR:346, MR:350). Notice that primitive }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'f1}{\lang2057\cgrid0  + }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 w}{\lang2057\cgrid0  produces Quenya }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ngw}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, while intervocalic }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'f1}{\lang2057\cgrid0  was lost: }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 T\'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 indicates}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (derived from the same root }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 te\'f1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 [WJ:394] as }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 te\'f1-w\'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > Q }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tengwe}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ) is clearly meant to represent earlier *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 te\'f1\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Since Tolkien also mentions Quenya }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 exists}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 engwe}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thing}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 in this context, we are obviously to assume that these descend from *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e\'f1\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e\'f1-w\'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (though he did not actually provide these pri
mitive forms). It would seem that the primitive stem having to do with }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 existence}{\lang2057\cgrid0  was *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 e\'f1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - (*}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 e\'f1e}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 E
\'f1\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  would be a primitive A-stem verb, the origin of Q }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0  meaning }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 is}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 exists}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Yet }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eb
a}{\lang2057\cgrid0  may also be interpreted as an imperative }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 be!}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , and this meaning is of course relevant for the use of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 E\'e4}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 as a name of the universe, since Eru gave existence to the Music of the Ainur by this very command: "I know the desire of your minds that what ye have seen should verily be...even as ye yourselves are, and yet other. Therefore I say: }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 E\'e4!}{\lang2057\cgrid0  Let these things Be!" (}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Ainulindal\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0 .) This imperative }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0  may be referred to *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e\'f1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 (}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0 )  }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , the latter element being the primitive imperative particle, "originally independent and variable in place" (WJ:365; compare the primitive imperative phrase }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 hek}{\lang2057\cgrid0 (}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ) }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > Quenya }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 heka!}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 be gone!}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , WJ:364-365). 
\endash  The fact that the word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0  appears in the Lord's Prayer translation is an important clue regarding the dating, for this word (or at least }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 E\'e4}{\lang2057\cgrid0 /}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'cba}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as a name of the universe) does not seem to have entered Tolkien's mythos before 1951; see LR:338, MR:7, 31.
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 elye}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , emphatic pronoun: }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 you}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thou}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Previously attested in Nam\'e1ri\'eb (there spelt with a diaeresis: }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ely\'eb}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 ); see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 emme}{\lang2057\cgrid0  below for further discussion.}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  [If }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 as elye}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  should really read }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 aselye}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
 in one word, the emphatic pronoun }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 elye}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  does not after all occur in this text.]}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 emme}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , emphatic pronoun: exclusive }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 we}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Also with dative ending: }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 emmen}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 (for) us}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. A new word in itself, but one that reassuringly confirms a pattern that has long been recognized: that pronominal endings can be turned into independent, emphatic pronouns by prefixing }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
-. Until now, our sole example has been }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ely\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thou}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (or, since it is emphatic, }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 even thou}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ) in Nam\'e1ri\'eb
. This is an emphatic, independent pronoun corresponding to the pronominal ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ly\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , as is clearly seen in the final line of the song: }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Nai hiruva}{\b\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 ly\'eb}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0  Valimar! Nai }{\b\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 ely\'eb}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0  hiruva!}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Maybe }{\i\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 thou}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0  shalt find Valimar! Maybe }{\i\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 even thou}{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0  shalt find it!}{\lang2057\cgrid0  For the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mme}{\lang2057\cgrid0  denoting exclusive }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 we}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 firuvamme}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ; }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
emme}{\lang2057\cgrid0  thus has the same relationship to the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mme}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 elye}{\lang2057\cgrid0  has to the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lye}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. (We know only one more emphatic pronoun, the first person form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 inye}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 I}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in LR:61, that connects with the pronominal ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nye}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. The form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 inye}{\lang2057\cgrid0  rather than **}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 eny\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  has been regarded as an exception to the normal rule [the prefixed }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
- in this case may reflect the stem-vowel of }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ni}{\scaps\lang2057\super\cgrid0 2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 I}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , LR:378]. The form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 emme}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 supports the theory that }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 inye}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is an exception, the prefix used to derive emphatic pronouns normally being }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - instead.) The dative form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 emmen}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  indicates that emphatic pronouns can take case endings, our first example of this.
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruo}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , inflected noun }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 God's}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , genitive of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eru}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 God}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or literally }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 the One}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 . The genitive of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eru}{\lang2057\cgrid0  was already attested in the phrase }{\b\lang2057 Oienkarm\'eb Eruo}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 the One's [Eru's, God's] perpetual production}{\lang2057  (MR:329, 471)}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 ; as for the genitive ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 o}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , see separate entry. All sources agree that the divine name }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eru}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (that the Elves pronounced on solemn occasions only, WJ:402/MR:211) is to be interpreted }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 the One}{\lang2057\cgrid0 : "There was Eru, the One, who in Arda is called Il\'favatar..." (}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Ainulindal\'eb}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 ). When asked what her Mannish tribe called God, Andreth told the Elven-king Finrod that it was "as it is with you [the Elves], but different only in sound: The One" (MR:352). Beyond such simple statements of what }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eru
}{\lang2057\cgrid0  means, its etymology as a Quenya word is not explicitly discussed anywhere (see SD:432 concerning }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'caru}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as an Ad\'fb
naic word, though). However, in Letters:384, Tolkien referred to the "important element }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 er}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (in Elvish) = 'one, single, alone'." One reason for its being "important" would presumably b
e that it is transparently the basis of the divine name. In the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Qenya Lexicon}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , this "element" appears as }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ere}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }
{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 be alone, deprived}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:356) or }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 remain alone}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (QL:36). In these sources the stem-vowel is reduplicated and suffixed, }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ere}{\lang2057\cgrid0  instead
 of just }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 er}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , but this is merely another way of quoting the stem. (See }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 firuvamme}{\lang2057\cgrid0  for the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 phir}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - also being quoted as }{
\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 phiri}{\lang2057\cgrid0  with the vowel repeated; see also }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 quanta}{\lang2057\cgrid0  regarding the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kwat}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - also being quoted as }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kwata}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 .) The name }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eru}{\lang2057\cgrid0  must be derived from the simplest form }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 er}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as in Letters:384, without }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 \'f3mataina}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (reduplicated and suffixed stem-vowel). The primitive form of the name would be *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Er\'fb}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , including the same masculine/animate ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'fb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as in the primitive words }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 at\'fb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 father}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:349 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ata}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 father}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ) and }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kher\'fb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  
}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 master}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (Letters:178, 282, stem given as }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kher}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 possess}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, cf. LR:364). Whether Tolkien meant that this name actually occurred in the primitive language is of course another matter: what they knew about Eru the Eldar must have learnt after they got to Valinor and were taught by the Valar (WJ:402 s.v. }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Eru}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). The Quenya name }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eru}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is indeed said to be an Elvish translation of a }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Valarin}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 name that is nowhere revealed (WJ:402 cf. 403). In any case, a name meaning }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 the One}{\lang2057\cgrid0  can obviously be applied to the God of the monotheistic Judeo-Christian conception, so Tolkien could use it to translate }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 God}{\lang2057\cgrid0  when rendering Christian/Catholic texts into Quenya.  
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruanno}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , noun in genitive: }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 of grace}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , transparently a compound incorporating }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eru}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 God}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 the One}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (see above). The nominative could also be #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruanno}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (since the genitive ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 o}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is "invisible" when added to words already ending in -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 o}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , cf. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\b\lang2057 \'b7}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Kiryamo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 the Mariner's}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 in UT:8), but this would leave the final element of the compound obscure, since no word *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 anno}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is known. The only other possible nominative is #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruanna}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, which would be a meaningful word: several sources (e.g. the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Silmarillion}{\lang2057\cgrid0  Appendix) give }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 anna}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as the Quenya word for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 gift}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . In the }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , LR:348, it is derived from a prepositional stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ana}{\scaps\lang2057\super\cgrid0 1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 to}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 towards}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , whence primitive }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 anta}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 to present, give}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , a verb also found in Quenya and indeed occurring in the text before us (see the entry }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 anta}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 ). Perhaps }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 anna}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 gift}{\lang2057\cgrid0  represents an old past participle *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 an-n\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 formed directly from the root and later used as a noun: }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 that which is brought forward, presented, given}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Whatever the precise etymology of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 anna}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , the compound *}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruanna}{\lang2057\cgrid0  would seem to denote }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 grace}{\lang2057\cgrid0  perceived as }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 God-gift}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 gift of God}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. In the published corpus, the only other word for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 grace}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lis}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 list}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -) from the early Qenya Lexi
con (p. 54). This word was developed from a wholly different idea: the root meaning is said to be }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 sweetness}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (p. 55; cf. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 lis}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 honey}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 in the later }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , LR:369, and }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lisse-miruv\'f3reva}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 of the sweet mead}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in Nam\'e1ri\'eb in LotR). However, it is interesting to s
ee that the Greek word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kharis}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 grace}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (related to the word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kekharit\'f4men\'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 favoured one}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 found in the Greek text of Hail Mary, cf. Luke 1:28) is seemingly equated with God's "gift" in 2 Corinthians 9:14-15: "Their prayers for you, too, show how they are drawn to you on account of all the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 grace}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 [a form of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kharis}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ] that God has given you. Thanks be to God for his inexpressible }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 gift}{\lang2057\cgrid0 " (quoted from }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 The Jerusalem Bible}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
). Perhaps it was this and similar Biblical passages that inspired #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruanna}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as the Quenya word for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 grace}{\lang2057\cgrid0 .
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Erumande}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , inflected noun: }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 (as?) in heaven}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. As indicated in the Syntactical analysis above, it is not altogether certain what the nominative of this word may be. Since the nominative of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 cemende}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 (as?) on earth}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is known to be }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 cemen}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , one plausible assumption could be that the word before us is #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruman}{\lang2057\cgrid0  inflected for the same (obscure) case.  (This obviously cannot be equated with the 
}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruman}{\lang2057\cgrid0  of LR:356 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ere}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, which is a "desert N.E. of Valinor".) Yet this strange "locative" (?) ending could also be #-}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nde}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , 
simplified to #-}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 de}{\lang2057\cgrid0  when added to a word ending in -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (like }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 cemen}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ); if so the nominative would be #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruma}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 . Both of these words can be assigned more or less plausible etymologies. #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruman}{\lang2057\cgrid0  could incorporate "the Valarin element }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 aman}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 man}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  'blessed, holy' [that the Elves] learned from Orom\'eb"; thus #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruman}{\lang2057\cgrid0  would identify "heaven" as the blessed and holy abode of the One (PM:357). It is also possible that #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 man}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  means }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 place}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , so that #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruman}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 The Place of God}{\lang2057\cgrid0 : A word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 men}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 place}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 spot}{\lang2057\cgrid0  occurs in Etym. (LR:372 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 men}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -), but one word seems to hint that Tolkien later changed it to #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 man
}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mane}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (perhaps he was troubled by the homophony with the dative pronoun #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 men}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 for us}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
): In SD:56, in an earlier version of the words spoken by Aragorn at his coronation, the word }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 here}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 in this place}{\lang2057\cgrid0  appears as }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edmane}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  (evidently }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'ed-mane}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 this-place}{\lang2057\cgrid0  \endash  cf. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edmen}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in F\'edriel's Song, see the entry }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'ed
ra}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). On the other hand, if we assume that the nominative is the shorter form #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruma}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , this could incorporate the not uncommon ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ma}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , primitive -}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 m\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . While this ending is primarily "a suffix frequent in the names of implements" (WJ:416), which is clearly not appropriate here, it can also take on more general meanings. For instance, the noun #}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 corma}{\lang2057\cgrid0  "ring" (attested in LotR as part of the compounds }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Cormar\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Ring-day}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 cormacolindor}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Ring-bearers}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , the latter translated in Letters:308) is clearly to be referred to the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kor}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - "round" (LR:365). Thus, a #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 corma}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is simply a *"round thing". Likewise, #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruma}{\lang2057\cgrid0  could \endash  presumably \endash  be simply "a thing (actually a place) associated with God", which "heaven" is. As for the precise }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 meaning}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  or significance of #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruma}{\lang2057\cgrid0 (}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
) (irrespective of its etymology), it would seem to denote the dwelling or presence of the One, evidently the "place" beyond and before E\'e4 where the dra
ma of the Music of the Ainur transpired. This would be "the fair regions that [Eru] had made for the Ainur", where afterwards "of the Ainur some abode still with Il\'favatar beyond the confines of the World" when others left and entered E\'e4 (see the }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Ainulindal\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). Since Melkor also left, we must assume that this was indeed a place where the will of Eru reigned supreme and unchallenged ("thy will be done, on earth as it is in heaven"). Hence #}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruma}{\lang2057\cgrid0 (}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ) can be used to translate English }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 heaven}{\lang2057\cgrid0  meaning the dwelling o
f the Deity, though unlike the English word it does not also refer to the sky above the earth; #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruma}{\lang2057\cgrid0 (}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ) would be beyond our universe altogether. The N\'famen\'f3
reans, taught by the Elves, "did not conceive of the sky as a divine residence" (Letters:204) \endash  which may explain why Tolkien did not use the standard Quenya translation of }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 heaven}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 menel}
{\lang2057\cgrid0 , in this prayer. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Menel}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is just "the region of the stars" (RGEO:72), "the firmament" (SD:401), "the apparent dome in the sky" (MR:387), the "heavens" above the physical earth (see the }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Silmarillion}{\lang2057\cgrid0  Index, entry }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 kemen}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , quoted under }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 cemen}{\lang2057\cgrid0  above). }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Menel}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 does not refer to the dwelling of God.
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 esselya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , noun with pronominal ending: }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thy name}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The possessive ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lya }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thy}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 your}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  corresponds to the verbal ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ly\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thou}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 elye}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). In the text before us, -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lya}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  also occurs in the words }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aranielya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thy kingdom}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ind\'f3melya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thy will}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 m\'f3nalyo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 of thy womb}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , in the latter case with the genitive ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 o}{\lang2057\cgrid0  added (regularly displacing the final -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  of -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). The ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  was previously attested only in the word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tielyanna}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 upon your path}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  (UT:22 cf. 51; this is }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tie-lya-nna}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 path-your-upon}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ), and it corresponds to the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ly\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  for }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 you}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thou}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (see -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mma}{\lang2057\cgrid0  for further discussion of the relationship between the pronominal suffixes for subject and poss
ession). The noun that -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is here suffixed to, }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 esse}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 name}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, is a well-known Quenya word, occurring in LotR, Appendix E as the (later) name of Tengwa No. 31. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Esse}{\lang2057\cgrid0  also occurs in various forms and compounds in MR:214-217, reproducing a post-LotR source. It i
s also found in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , where it is derived from a stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 es}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 indicate}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 name}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (LR:356). The ancestral form is nowhere given but is probably *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ess\'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 often being used to derive nouns denoting intangibles or abstracts: examples include such primitive forms as }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'ean\'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 remembrance}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (PM:372, base given as }{
\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ren}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -), }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 sl\'eew\'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 sickness}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:386 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 sliw}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -), or }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 t\'fbr\'ea}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 mastery}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 victory}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:395 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 tur}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -). *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Ess\'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0  from }{
\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 es}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - is however not wholly parallel to these formations; instead of lengthening the stem-vowel (which would have produced primitive **}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eas\'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > Quenya **}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e9ze}{\lang2057\cgrid0 /}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e9re}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ), the consonant }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0  of the stem is lengthened. This may be compared to the derivation of the primitive noun }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lass\'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 leaf}{\lang2057\cgrid0  from the base }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 las}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - (in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 las}{
\lang2057\super\cgrid0 1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, LR:367; cf. also Letters:282). In the essay }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Quendi and Eldar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , Tolkien explained that the "true relation" of the derivative }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lass\'ea}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  to its stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 las}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - can be expressed as }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 laS-\'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (VT39:9), the capital }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 S}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 denoting a strengthened or lengthened consonant. Similarly, the relation of *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ess\'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0  to its stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 es}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - may be described as *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 eS-\'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. (Compare #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 massa}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 bread}{\lang2057\cgrid0  from the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 mbas}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -; see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 massamma}{\lang2057\cgrid0 .)
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 etelehta}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , verb }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 free}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 release}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 deliver}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . It would seem that the #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lehta}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 - part is essentially the same as the Quenya verb }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lehta}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 loose}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 slacken}{\lang2057\cgrid0  listed in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}
{\lang2057\cgrid0 , in LR:368 derived from a stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 lek}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 loose}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 let loose}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 release}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (primitive *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lekt\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -; this would be one of the cases where the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 t\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  adds nothing to the meaning of the stem itself). It is closely related to Noldorin/Sindarin }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 leithia}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 release}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (as verb; noun }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 leithian}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , as in the Lay of }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Leithian}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 or "Release from Bondage" referred to in the first paragraph of Chapter 19 in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Silmarillion}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). Unlike the more mundane meaning of Quenya }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lehta}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 loose}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 slacken}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , these Sindarin forms more prominently seem to connote a }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 release}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 freeing}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, and this is also true of the longer Quenya verb }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 etelehta}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - in the text before us. The prefixed element }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ete}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - can evidently be equated with the Quenya prefix }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 et}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - that in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is derived from a stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 et}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 forth}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 out}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:356; the prefix as such is undefined, but it is clearly meant to have the same meaning as the stem). }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Etelehta}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - would seem to mean literally }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 out-release}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 or }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 out-free }{\lang2057\cgrid0 (here in Norway we actually use the word }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 utfri}{\lang2057\cgrid0  for "deliver" as in delivering someone from danger); the id
ea is that the object is brought "out" from the danger or menacing/suppressing situation. It is interesting to see that the prefix }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 et}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - is lengthened to }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ete}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
- where an impossible consonant cluster would otherwise occur (in this case **}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tl}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). It may be that the second }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is the stem-vowel of }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 et}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 - reduplicated; on the other hand, it may simply be the normal "connecting vowel" }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as in the allative form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Elendilenna}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 to Elendil}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  in PM:401 (}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Elendil}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nna}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). The short form of the prefix, }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 et}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
-, can actually occur only when it is prefixed to words beginning either in a vowel or in one of the consonants }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 t}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 w}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - or }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 y}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - (for }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 t}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - we have an attested example: }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ettuler}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in SD:290). Otherwise the form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ete}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
- must be used to avoid impossible clusters. (However, in one old example, primitive }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 etkel\'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0  *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 out-flow}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 t}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 k}
{\lang2057\cgrid0  early metathesized, and Quenya }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ehtele}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 spring}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 issue of water}{\lang2057\cgrid0  comes from }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ektele}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 . See LR:363 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kel}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -. If this Quenya word had been coined later, instead of descending from the oldest period, it would perhaps have appeared as **}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 etekele}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  instead.)
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 firuvamme}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , future-tense verb with pronominal ending: *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 we shall die}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The verb }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 fir}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 fade}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 die}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is mentioned in MC:223, clearly to be referred to the root }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 phir}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (LR:381), which yields words having to do with death and mortality. The base itself was not defined in Etym., but in MR:250 it is explained that the verb }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 f\'edr\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (read *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 fir\'eb}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 ?) originally "meant to 'expire', as of one sighing or releasing a deep breath... This word the Eldar afterwards used of the death of Men." A reference in WJ:387 confirms this; here the stem is quoted as }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 phiri}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , glossed }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 exhale}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 expire}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 breathe out}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . In the text before us, }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 fir}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
- occurs in the future tense, denoted by the well-known ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 uva}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (many attestations, e.g. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kenuva}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 shall see}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in MC:221 cf. 214 or }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 hiruva}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 shalt find}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in Nam\'e1ri\'eb; in the present text it also occurs in the word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tuluva}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , q.v.) The pronominal ending -}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mme}{\lang2057\cgrid0  denotes exclusive }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 we}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , that is, a "we" that does not include the person that is addressed. If one is talking about "we" to a person that 
is included in the "we" group, the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lme}{\lang2057\cgrid0  for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 inclusive }{\lang2057\cgrid0 "we" would be employed. Previously, the exclusive ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mme}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 was attested only in the word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 vamme}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 we won't}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in WJ:371. It corresponds to the independent pronouns #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 me}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1
me}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ) and }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 emme}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , plus the possessive ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mma}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 our}{\lang2057\cgrid0  seen in }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1taremma}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 massamma}{\lang2057\cgrid0 .
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 han}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is evidently a preposition, but its meaning is uncertain: }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 in}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ? }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 among}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ? }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 permeating}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ? }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 above}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ? }{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [VT43:14 quotes }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 han}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  = "beyond" from a very late (ca. 1970) manuscript.] }{\lang2057\cgrid0 This preposition, if that is what it i
s, would seem to describe the "spatial" relationship between Eru and E\'e4, God and the Universe \endash  however that is to be imagined. No really plausible etymology can be offered. The stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 khan}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 understand}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 comprehend}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:363) could have yielded a word of this shape, but its meaning certainly seems to disqualify it. The stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kham}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 sit}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (ibid.) just might be relevant, if }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 han}{\lang2057\cgrid0  refers to some kind of stationary position (final -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 m}{\lang2057\cgrid0  regularly becoming -
}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in Quenya). Unfortunately, all Christopher Tolkien reproduced of this entry in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0  was the verb }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ham}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 sit}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ; "the other derivatives are too chaotic and unclear to present". \endash  By another suggestion }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 han}{\lang2057\cgrid0  could be a variant of the known preposition }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 an}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0  glossed "to, towards" (LR:374 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 na}{\lang2057\super\cgrid0 2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -); if s
o it is here used with a different shade of meaning, since "to" would not make much sense in this context. By this theory, the }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 h}{\lang2057\cgrid0  prefixed to }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 an}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is merely an intruding consonant inserted to avoid two }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{\lang2057\cgrid0 's in a sequence (the word before }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 han}{\lang2057\cgrid0  being }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). However
, no other Quenya examples of such an intruding }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 h}{\lang2057\cgrid0  can be quoted. \endash 
 It may be noted that in a text reproduced in MC:217, apparently some variant of "Gnomish" (but somewhat closer to Sindarin than the Gnomish of the GL), there occurs a phrase }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 han Nebrachar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . This is translated }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 above Nebrachar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . We must of course be very wary about basing conclusions regarding LotR-style Quenya on an obscure Gnomish variant of the early thirties, but if the word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 han}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 has the same meaning in the text before us, }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1taremma i \'eba }{\b\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 han}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0  \'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0  might mean}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0  *our Father who is }{\i\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 above}{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0  E\'e4}{\lang2057\cgrid0  \endash  as if Tolkien used a circumlocution instead of translating "who art in heaven" literally. (However, the normal Quenya word for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 above}{\lang2057\cgrid0  would seem to be }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 or}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , as in Cirion's Oath.) }{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [In VT43 it is argued that }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 i \'eba han \'eba}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  means "who is beyond E\'e4
", which would indeed be a circumlocution. The fact that }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 han}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
 appears with the meaning "beyond" in a manuscript 15-20 years younger than the Lord's Prayer text cannot be seen as conclusive regarding its meaning here. However, a variant version of the prayer used the word }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 pella}{
\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  instead, a well-known Quenya word for "beyond". This suggests that "who is beyond E\'e4" may indeed be the intended meaning here.]}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 H\'e9ru}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , noun }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 lord}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Other sources, like the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Silmarillion}{\lang2057\cgrid0  Appendix and the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , give }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 heru}{\lang2057\cgrid0  with a short }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0  \endash  though in Etym, a long vowel turns up in the "Old Noldorin" cognate }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kh\'e9ro}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 master}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:364 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kher}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -). In Letters:283, the Quenya word for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 lord}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is quoted as }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 h\'e9r}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , Tolkien adding }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 heru}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as a parenthetical alternative; the new form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 h\'e9ru}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 seems to combine these two alternatives. In VT41:9, reproducing a document dating from the late sixties, the Quenya word is again }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 h\'e9r}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , which Tolkien here refers to Common Eldarin }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kh\'ear}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 . In PM:210 the Quenya word for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 lord}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is said to be "}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 heru}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 h\'ear}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -"; this could be taken to mean that the word }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 heru}{\lang2057\cgrid0  turns into }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 h\'e9r}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - if you add an ending (e.g. genitive *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 h\'e9ro}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ), but it is uncertain precisely what Tolkien meant. Again }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 h\'e9ru}{\lang2057\cgrid0  apparently combines both }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 heru}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 h\'e9r}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -. As for the etymology, the primitive form of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 heru }{
\lang2057\cgrid0 (sic) is given as }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kher\'fb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 master}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in Letters:178, 282; the root is there given as }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kher}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
possess}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (cf. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kher}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 rule}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 govern}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 possess}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , LR:364). The ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'fb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  may simply denote a (masculine) animate, as in primitive }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 at\'fb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 father}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or *}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Er\'fb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 the One}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (see the discussion of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eru}{\lang2057\cgrid0  under }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  for references), but in primitive }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kher\'fb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  the ending takes on an }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 agental}{\lang2057\cgrid0  significance: In light of the root meaning, a }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kher\'fb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is a "lord" perceived as a }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 possessor}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 ruler}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 governor}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The variant form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 h\'e9ru}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in the text before us 
must be assumed to represent an alternative primitive form *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kh\'ear\'fb}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 with lengthening of the stem-vowel. Such lengthening is quite common (though not universal) in conjunction with another ending that can be either agental or simply masculine, namely -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'f4}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ; for instance, the stem }{
\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kan}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 cry}{\lang2057\cgrid0  yields a primitive noun }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 k\'e2n\'f4 }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 crier, herald}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (PM:361, 362; this is said to be an example of "the older and simplest agental form"). Perhaps, then, the much rarer ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'fb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  could also be combined with lengthening of the stem-vowel. \endash 
 A final possibility, suggested above in connection with the somewhat surprising form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1taremma}{\lang2057\cgrid0  rather than }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Ataremma}{\lang2057\cgrid0  for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 our Father }{\lang2057\cgrid0 (
}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 atar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 father}{\lang2057\cgrid0  having a }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 short}{\lang2057\cgrid0  initial vowel in all other attestations), is that normal, common nouns may be }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
strengthened}{\lang2057\cgrid0  by lengthening a vowel when they are used as divine titles. Hence }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 atar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1tar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and perhaps likewise }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 heru}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  > }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 H\'e9ru}{\lang2057\cgrid0 .
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang2057\cgrid0 \tab }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 hyame}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , verb }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 pray}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , attested in conjunction with the imperative particle }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  (that may indeed be directly prefixed to produce }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1hyame}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ; as indicated above, it is not quite clear how we should read Tolkien's manuscript). }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Hyame}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 would seem to represent the uninflected stem of a "basic" verb #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 hyam}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 pray}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , never before attested. Earlier we only had }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Erukyerm\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Prayer to Eru}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in UT:166, 436. Since the group }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ky}{\lang2057\cgrid0  may seem to be abnormal for Quenya (primitive }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ky}{\lang2057\cgrid0  normally becomes }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ty}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ), it has been suggested that }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Erukyerm\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  might be a misreading for **}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruhyerm\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in Tolkien's manuscript. This would point to **}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 hyer}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - as the stem of the verb }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 pray}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , at least slightly more similar to #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 hyam}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
- in the text before us. However, Christopher Tolkien in a letter to David Salo indicates that the reading }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Erukyerm\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is certainly correct; the form occurs repeatedly in a }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 typewritten}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  manuscript that was moreover carefully corrected by his father. The #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kyer}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Erukyerm\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is evidently wholly unrelated to the #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 hyam}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 - of Hail Mary, though both seem to be verbal stems meaning }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 pray}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (the word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Erukyerm\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 was probably coined about a decade after the Hail Mary-translation was made, found in a text apparently written not long before 1965; cf. UT:7). No plausible }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 etymology}{\lang2057\cgrid0  for #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 hyam}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 - can be proposed; it would probably require a primitive stem *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 khyam}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - or *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 syam}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 skyam}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -. 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\lang2057\cgrid0  1) definite article: }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i H\'e9ru}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 the Lord}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i y\'e1ve}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 the fruit}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ; 2) relative pronoun }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 who}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , both singular and plural:}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0  \'c1taremma i \'eba}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 ... our Father who is...}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tien i \'facarer }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 those who trespass/sin}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Both usages are well attested before; as for the article, we have for instance }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i eleni}{\lang2057\cgrid0  = }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 the stars}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in Nam\'e1ri\'eb. The phrase }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i Eru i or ily\'eb mahalmar e\'e4}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 the One who is above all thrones}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 in Cirion's Oath in UT:305, 317 includes }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\lang2057\cgrid0  used both as an article and as a relative pronoun. For }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\lang2057\cgrid0  used as a }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 plural}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 relative pronoun, cf. the phrase }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i karir quettar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 those who make words}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in WJ:391. The }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0  confirms that }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i}
{\lang2057\cgrid0  is "in Q...indeclinable article 'the'"; it is derived from a base }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - that is defined as }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 that}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 and said to be a "deictic particle" (LR:361). Perhaps we are to understand that Primitive Quendian did not have a definite article as such, but that a particle that originally meant }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 that}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 had its meaning weakened to }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 the}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (e.g. primitive *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i galad\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 that tree}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > Quenya *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i alda}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 the tree}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). The Romance languages got their definite articles just like this: Their ancestor Latin had no word for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 the}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , but the meaning of Latin demonstratives (typically }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 ille}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 illa}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ) was weakened to produce articles like }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 la }{\lang2057\cgrid0 or }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 el}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . There is nothing in the }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0  about }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\lang2057\cgrid0  being used as a relative pronoun as well, but this is not a surprising phenomenon. Cf. for instance German, where the articles }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 der}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 das}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 die}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (for various genders and numbers) are also used as relative pronouns.
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ilaur\'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , adjective }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 daily}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 everyday}{\lang2057\cgrid0 : }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ilaur\'eba massamma}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 our daily bread
}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The word as such is new, but in the middle of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ilaur\'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0  we discern the well-known noun }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aur\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 day}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . In earlier e
ditions of }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 The Lord of the Rings}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , Appendix D mentioned }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aur\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 l\'f3m\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as the Quenya words for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 day}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  and }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 night}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , though this particular piece of information was omitted from the revised edition. In any case, }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aur\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  reappeared in chapter 20 of the }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Silmarillion}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , Fingon crying }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ut\'falie'n aur\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 the day has come}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , before the Nirnaeth Arnoediad (H\'farin following up with }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aur\'eb entuluva}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 day shall come again}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , when the battle was lost). The }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Silmarillion}{\lang2057\cgrid0  Appendix, entry}{\b\lang2057  ur}{\i\lang2057 
- heat, be hot}{\lang2057 , defines }{\b\lang2057 aur\'eb}{\lang2057  as }{\i\lang2057 sunlight}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 day}{\lang2057 . In the }{\i\lang2057 Etymologies}{\lang2057 , the stem }{\scaps\lang2057 ur-}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 be hot}{
\lang2057  was struck through (LR:396), but Tolkien must have restored it later: The word }{\b\lang2057 Urim\'eb}{\lang2057  (or }{\b\lang2057 \'darim\'eb}{\lang2057 
) as a name of the month of August, occurring in LotR, Appendix D, is clearly to be derived from this stem, and the entry }{\b\lang2057 ur}{\lang2057 - in the }{\i\lang2057 Silmarillion}{\lang2057  Appendix confirms this. The word }{\b\lang2057 aur\'eb}{
\lang2057  was however not listed in the }{\i\lang2057 Etymologies}{\lang2057  even while the stem }{\scaps\lang2057 ur}{\lang2057 - persisted there. The added }{\b\lang2057 a}{\lang2057  in }{\b\lang2057 aur\'eb}{\lang2057  must be seen as an example of 
}{\scaps\lang2057 a}{\lang2057 -infixion, parallel to the process that results in such primitive forms as }{\b\lang2057 thaus\'e2}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 foul}{\lang2057  from the stem }{\scaps\lang2057 thus-}{\i\lang2057  }{\lang2057 (LR:393) or }{
\b\lang2057 taur\'e2}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 mighty}{\lang2057  from }{\scaps\lang2057 tur-}{\lang2057  (LR:395). In }{\i\lang2057 Quendi and Eldar}{\lang2057 , Tolkien stated that words formed by }{\scaps\lang2057 a}{\lang2057 
-infixion "were mostly 'intensive', as in...[Quenya] }{\i\lang2057 taura}{\lang2057  'very mighty, vast, of unmeasured might or size' (*}{\scaps\lang2057 tur}{\lang2057 ). Some were 'continuative', as in }{\i\lang2057 Vaire}{\lang2057  'Ever-weaving' (*}{
\scaps\lang2057 wir}{\lang2057 )" (VT39:10). In the case of a root like }{\scaps\lang2057 ur}{\lang2057 -, }{\scaps\lang2057 a}{\lang2057 -infixion of course cannot be distinguished from }{\scaps\lang2057 a}{\lang2057 -}{\i\lang2057 prefixing}{\lang2057 
, since there is no initial consonant. Whether the resulting stem *}{\scaps\lang2057 aur}{\lang2057 - is to be seen as "i
ntensive" or "continuative" is a matter of taste; the period of daylight is perhaps perceived as "continually hot" when compared to the colder night. The complete primitive word }{\i\lang2057 day}{\lang2057  must be either *}{\b\lang2057 aur\'ea}{
\lang2057  (since the ending -}{\b\lang2057 \'ea}{\lang2057  may be used to derive words for abstract or intangible things) or *}{\b\lang2057 auri}{\lang2057  (compare primitive }{\b\lang2057 ari}{\lang2057  as the source of Q }{\b\lang2057 are}{
\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 day}{\lang2057  in LR:349 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057 ar}{\lang2057\super 1}{\lang2057 -). }{\b\lang2057 Ilaur\'eba}{\lang2057  shows a prefix }{\b\lang2057 il}{\lang2057 - that can safely be referred to the stem }{\scaps\lang2057 il}{
\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 all}{\lang2057  (LR:361). The same source provides an example of the prefix }{\b\lang2057 il}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 every}{\lang2057 -; it occurs as part of the word }{\b\lang2057 ilqa}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 everything}{
\lang2057  (better spelt }{\b\lang2057 ilqua}{\lang2057  according to Tolkien's later system). WJ:372 also has }{\b\lang2057 ilquen}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 everybody}{\lang2057  (incorporating -}{\b\lang2057 quen}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 person}{
\lang2057 ). #}{\b\lang2057 Ilaur\'eb}{\lang2057  thus means }{\i\lang2057 everyday}{\lang2057  as a noun (though this may not necessarily exist as an independent word); to this form the adjectival ending -}{\b\lang2057 a}{\lang2057 
 has been added to produce }{\b\lang2057 ilaur\'eba}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 daily}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 of every day}{\lang2057 . This word is somewhat similar to }{\b\lang2057 amaur\'eba}{\lang2057 , said to be a poetic word for }{\i\lang2057 dawn
}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 early day}{\lang2057  (MC:223). While this also seems to incorporate }{\b\lang2057 aur\'eb}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 day}{\lang2057 , the ending -}{\b\lang2057 a}{\lang2057 
 is apparently not adjectival here, unless this is actually an adjective that is also used as a noun. }{\b\lang2057 Ilaur\'eba}{\lang2057  in any case belongs to the part of speech that we would expect. \endash 
 For the purpose of dating, it is interesting that the word }{\b\lang2057 aur\'eb}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 day}{\lang2057  is included in the text before us. While a word }{\b\lang2057 aure}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 sunlight}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 
sunshine}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 gold}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 light}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 warmth}{\lang2057  had appeared already in the Qenya Lexicon of 1915 (QL:33), this word as a term for }{\i\lang2057 day}{\lang2057 
 arose relatively late in Tolkien's conception and apparently does not predate the LotR Appendices. (In the "Qenya" of the 1915 Lexicon, the words for }{\i\lang2057 day}{\lang2057  are }{\b\lang2057 kala}{\lang2057  of daylight as opposed to night, and }{
\b\lang2057 l\'fa}{\lang2057  of a full 24-hour cycle [QL:44, 56] \endash  but in later Quenya, these words reappear with the much more general meanings }{\i\lang2057 light}{\lang2057  and }{\i\lang2057 occasion}{\lang2057 
, respectively.) As indicated above, in the }{\i\lang2057 Etymologies}{\lang2057  of the mid-thirties the Quenya word for "day" had been }{\b\lang2057 are}{\lang2057  (LR:349 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057 ar}{\lang2057\super 1}{\lang2057 
), and this word was still valid in Tolkien's early drafts for the LotR Appendices: In PM:127 we have a reference to "the Eldarin 'day' or }{\i\lang2057 ar\'eb}{\lang2057 ". When Tolkien first coined such a word as }{\b\lang2057 mettar\'eb}{\lang2057 
, mentioned in Appendix D as the last day of the year, he may well have thought of this as a compound }{\b\lang2057 metta}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 end}{\lang2057  + }{\b\lang2057 ar\'eb}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 day}{\lang2057 
. Then it seems that for some reason he rejected }{\scaps\lang2057 ar}{\lang2057\super 1}{\lang2057  as the stem yielding words for "day". Perhaps wishing to keep such compounds as }{\b\lang2057 mettar\'eb}{\lang2057 
 unchanged, he introduced the Elvish word }{\b\lang2057 r\'e9}{\lang2057  (LotR, Appendix D: "a 'day' of the sun they called }{\i\lang2057 r\'e9}{\lang2057  and reckoned from sunset to sunset"). Now }{\b\lang2057 mettar\'eb}{\lang2057 
 could be re-explained as }{\b\lang2057 metta}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 end }{\lang2057 + }{\b\lang2057 r\'e9}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 (24-hour) day}{\lang2057 , the long }{\b\lang2057 \'e9}{\lang2057 
 naturally being shortened at the end of a compound. The earlier word }{\b\lang2057 are}{\lang2057  survived as }{\b\lang2057 \'e1re}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 sunlight}{\lang2057 
, mentioned in Appendix E as the older name of Tengwa No. 31. But here it is also said that }{\b\lang2057 \'e1re }{\lang2057 was earlier }{\b\lang2057 \'e1ze}{\lang2057 , indicating that Tolkien now thought of the original stem as }{\scaps\lang2057 as}{
\lang2057 , not }{\scaps\lang2057 ar}{\lang2057  as it had been in the }{\i\lang2057 Etymologies}{\lang2057 : The sound }{\b\lang2057 r}{\lang2057  was no longer perceived as original, but arose from original }{\b\lang2057 s}{\lang2057  (via }{
\b\lang2057 z}{\lang2057 ). For a stem }{\scaps\lang2057 as}{\lang2057 , see the entry }{\b\lang2057 arien}{\lang2057  in the }{\i\lang2057 Silmarillion}{\lang2057  Appendix; cf. also such
 a post-LotR source as MR:380, where it is said that the name of the sun was originally }{\b\lang2057 \'c2s}{\lang2057 , "which is as near as it can be interpreted Warmth, to which are joined Light and Solace". MR:380 also mentions }{\b\lang2057 \'c1zi
\'eb}{\lang2057 , "later" }{\b\lang2057 \'c1ri\'eb}{\lang2057 , as the name of the spirit of the sun, displaying the same development (}{\b\lang2057 s}{\lang2057  >) }{\b\lang2057 z}{\lang2057  > }{\b\lang2057 r}{\lang2057  as in }{\b\lang2057 \'e1ze}{
\lang2057  > }{\b\lang2057 \'e1re}{\lang2057 . But these revisions in Tolkien's conception necessitated further changes. In earlier editions of LotR, Appendix D quoted the Sindarin word for }{\i\lang2057 day}{\lang2057  (used of a full 24-hour cycle) as }
{\b\lang2057 aur}{\lang2057 . This superficially agrees with the }{\i\lang2057 Etymologies}{\lang2057 , where the Noldorin/Sindarin word for }{\i\lang2057 day}{\lang2057  or }{\i\lang2057 morning}{\lang2057  had likewise been given as }{\b\lang2057 aur}{
\lang2057  (LR:349). By the time Etym was written, this }{\b\lang2057 aur}{\lang2057  was probably perceived as the cognate of Quenya }{\b\lang2057 \'e1ra}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 dawn}{\lang2057  (for Quenya long }{\b\lang2057 \'e1}{\lang2057  corr
esponding to Noldorin/Sindarin }{\b\lang2057 au}{\lang2057 , cf. for instance Q }{\b\lang2057 n\'e1r}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 flame}{\lang2057  being the cognate of N/S }{\b\lang2057 naur}{\lang2057 , LR:374 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057 nar}{\lang2057\super 1}
{\lang2057 -). Sindarin }{\b\lang2057 aur}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 day}{\lang2057 , as quoted in Appendix D in earlier editions of LotR, could similarly have been the cognate of the Quenya word }{\b\lang2057 \'e1re}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 sunlight}{
\lang2057  that is mentioned (as the name of a Tengwa) in Appendix E \endash  }{\i\lang2057 if}{\lang2057  Tolkien had not changed the stem from }{\scaps\lang2057 ar}{\lang2057  to }{\scaps\lang2057 as}{\lang2057 . In Sindarin, }{\b\lang2057 r}{\lang2057 
 cannot come from earlier }{\b\lang2057 s}{\lang2057 ; nothing like the development }{\b\lang2057 s}{\lang2057  > }{\b\lang2057 z}{\lang2057  > }{\b\lang2057 r}{\lang2057  occurs in Sindarin (or the Noldorin of the }{\i\lang2057 Etymologies}{\lang2057 
). So if Tolkien wanted to keep }{\b\lang2057 aur}{\lang2057  as the Sindarin word for }{\i\lang2057 day}{\lang2057  (and he clearly did), a new etymology had to be sought; }{\b\lang2057 aur}{\lang2057  could not be referred to the new stem }{
\scaps\lang2057 as}{\lang2057  that had replaced }{\scaps\lang2057 ar}{\lang2057 . Hence Tolkien instead decided to derive }{\b\lang2057 aur}{\lang2057  from the (already invented) stem }{\scaps\lang2057 ur}{\lang2057  having to do with }{\i\lang2057 heat
}{\lang2057 , evidently envisioning an }{\scaps\lang2057 a}{\lang2057 -infixed (or }{\scaps\lang2057 a}{\lang2057 -prefixed) variant *}{\scaps\lang2057 aur}{\lang2057  as outlined above: Here the sound }{\b\lang2057 r}{\lang2057 
 was original and simply remained unchanged in Sindarin. However, this derivation brought up the question of whether there might not be a Quenya cognate \endash  and }{\i\lang2057 this}{\lang2057 , it seems, is how the Quenya word }{\b\lang2057 aur\'eb}{
\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 day}{\lang2057  arose. Since this word refers to "day" only in the sense of "daylight", it could very well coexist with the new word }{\b\lang2057 r\'e9}{\lang2057 , that means "day" in the sense of a full 24-hour cycle. The word 
}{\b\lang2057 aur\'eb}{\lang2057  with the meaning }{\i\lang2057 day}{\lang2057  thus evidently does not predate the LotR, and the fact that it is incorporated in the adjective }{\b\lang2057 ilaur\'eba}{\lang2057 
 in the text before us, probably places this text in the post-LotR period (after the book was written, but not necessarily before it was published).}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par im\'edca}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , preposition }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 among}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Undoubtedly this is to be derived from the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 mi}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 inside}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, the source of the Quenya preposition }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mi}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 in, within}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:373). The #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 im\'ed}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
- part of the word before us would seem to represent a stemvowel-prefixed variant of this stem (an entry }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 imi}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 in}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 into}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 actually occurs in the Qenya Lexicon p. 42). Notice that "where }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is base vowel" (as in }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 mi-}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ), }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
- can function as an "intensive prefix" (LR:361 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -). This "prefix" actually amounts to reduplication of the base vowel itself; for an example with another vowel, cf. primitive }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 akw\'e2}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  as an "extension or intensification" of the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kwa}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (WJ:392). Notice that }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 akw\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  from }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kwa}{\lang2057\cgrid0  would parallel #}
{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 im\'ed}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - (*}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 im\'ee}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -) from }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 mi}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - also in the fact that the stem-vowel is lengthened in its normal position. This leaves the ending -}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ca}{\lang2057\cgrid0  to be accounted for. It would descend from -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 k\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , attested as a primitive }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 adjectival}{\lang2057\cgrid0  suffix (as when the stem }{
\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 gaya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 awe}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 dread}{\lang2057\cgrid0  yields primitive }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 gayak\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, explicitly said to be "an adjectival form"; this was also the source of Quenya }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aika}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 fell}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 terrible}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 dire}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  \endash  PM:363 cf. 347). Can an adjectival suffix be used to derive a preposition? This would not be wholly unheard of in Tolkien's languages: The ancient ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 w\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is seen to be adjectival (e.g. primitive }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 laik-w\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 green}{\lang2057\cgrid0  from the undefined stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 l\'e1yak}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, LR:368, or primitive }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 smalw\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 fallow}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 pale}{\lang2057\cgrid0  from }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 smal}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 yellow}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, LR:386). Yet in WJ:365 the same ending turns up on the primitive  "adverb and preposition" }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 hekw\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 leaving aside}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 not counting}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 excluding}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 except}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (WJ:365; the root is }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 heke}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 aside}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 apart}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 separate}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , WJ:361). If the adjectival ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 w\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 can also be used to derive adverbs or prepositions, perhaps this is true of other adjectival endings, like -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 k\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , as well? Another interpretation is also possible: If }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 im\'edca}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  does not represent *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 im\'ee-k\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , the }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 c}{\lang2057\cgrid0  of the Quenya word may come from an extended form of the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 mi}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
-. It is possible that }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 mi}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - had an extended form *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 mik}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -. (Cf. other extensions in -}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 k}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , like }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 lep}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 - having the longer form }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 lepek}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ot}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - being extended to }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 otok}{\lang2057\cgrid0 : LR:368, 379. This *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 
mik}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - would of course be distinct from }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 mik}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 pierce}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in WJ:337.) It may be noted that in the entry for }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 mi}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
- in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:373), a Quenya adjective }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mitya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 interior}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is listed. No primitive form is listed, but it could very well be *}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 miky\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (*-}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 y\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  being a well attested adjectival ending; for the development }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ky}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ty}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, cf. for instance Quenya }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tyar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 cause}{\lang2057\cgrid0  from the root }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kyar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, LR:366). This extended stem *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 mik}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 - could then have a stemvowel-prefixed variant *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 im\'eek}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, whence *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 im\'eek\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > Quenya }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 im\'edca}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. This would only leave the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (from *-}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ) to be accounted for. WJ:382 mentions an adjectival ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, and as demonstrated above, it may not be wholly unprecedented that a properly adjectival ending is used to derive a preposition.
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ind\'f3melya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , noun with a pronominal suffix: }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thy will}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Removing -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thy}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (concerning this ending, see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 esselya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ), we are left with #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ind\'f3me}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as the noun }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 will}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, a new word wholly different from earlier known words of the same meaning (like }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nirme}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , VT39:30, or }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'feelma}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 selma}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , WJ:319). Yet #}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ind\'f3me}{\lang2057\cgrid0  seems to be made up of familiar elements. It transparently incorporates }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 indo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 heart}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 mood}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 . This word is apparently not used of the physical heart, which is }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 h\'f3n}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:364 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kh\'f4-n}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -); }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 indo}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is rather the figurative "heart" representing feelings, moods and desires. In the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 \'d3sanwe-kenta}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , Tolkien defined }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 indo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 state}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (VT39:23) \endash  evidently primarily state of }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 mind}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , given both the context and the other glosses. When trying to connect #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ind\'f3me}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 will}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  to }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 indo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 heart}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 mood}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 state}{\lang2057\cgrid0  it is encouraging to notice that in the }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 indo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is derived from the base }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 id}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 desire}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (LR:391); there is no great semantic leap from }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 desire}{\lang2057\cgrid0  to }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 will}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Quenya }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 indo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  might represent primitive *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ind\'f4}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , formed from }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 id}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - by means of nasal infixion and the nominal ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'f4}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . (This ending is often agental; perhaps
 the heart is perceived as a "desirer". For a formation that employs similar devices, cf. primitive }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mband\'f4}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 custody}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 safe-keeping}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 [MR:350] in relation to the root }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 mbad}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 duress}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 prison}{\lang2057\cgrid0  [LR:371], though in this case the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'f4}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  and the nasal infixion add little to the meaning of the root itself.) Alternatively the primitive form might be *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 idn\'f4}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , displaying another agental ending (cf. for instance primitive }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 syadn\'f4}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 cleaver}{\lang2057\cgrid0  from the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 syad}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 cleave}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , LR:389); later this became Quenya }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 indo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  by metathesis }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 dn}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nd}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (cf. Quenya }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ando}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 gate}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 from primitive }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 adn\'f4}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , LR:348 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ad}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -). As for the derivation of Quenya }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 indo}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 there are also yet other alternatives; UT:400 mentions an "element" }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 in(id)}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 mind}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in the discussion of the first element of }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Inc\'e1nus}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  (one of Gandalf's more obscure names, which it is here hinted may be Quenya for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Mind-leader}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). This }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 in(id)}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - would be a basic stem *}{
\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 in}{\lang2057\cgrid0  that has an "extended" form }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 inid }{\lang2057\cgrid0 (with reduplicated stem-vowel, so-called }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 \'f3mataina}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , and a suffixed -}{
\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 d}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). This could also be the source of Quenya }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 indo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 heart}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 mind}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
; the primitive form would then be either *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 inid\'f4}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ind\'f4}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 yet again (for suppression of the reduplicated stem-vowel of an extended base in its actual derivatives, compare the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 g\'f3lob}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - in LR:359 yielding primitive }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 golb\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  
}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 branch}{\lang2057\cgrid0  \endash  not **}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 golob\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , 
though other examples indicate that this would be equally possible). In the latest material we have access to (early 1968), Tolkien proposed yet another derivation; now Quenya }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 indo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  was referred to a base }{
\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 nid}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 force}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 press(ure)}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thrust}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , and again the primitive form must be either *}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ind\'f4}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 inid\'f4}{\lang2057\cgrid0  \endash  in this version with a }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 prefixed}{\lang2057\cgrid0  stem-vowel. The same source defines }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 indo}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  as "the mind in its purposing faculty, the will" (VT41:17): semantically very close to the use of #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ind\'f3me}{\lang2057\cgrid0  here. The long final vowel of *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 inid\'f4}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or *}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ind\'f4}{\lang2057\cgrid0 /*}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 idn\'f4}{\lang2057\cgrid0  has been shortened in the normal Quenya simplex }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 indo}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , but in the word #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ind\'f3me}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (where it receives the accent) it remains long. The ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 me}{\lang2057\cgrid0  that has here been added is attested in quite a few Quenya words. It may function as a verbal noun ending; hence we have }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 melme}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  as the noun }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 love}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , derived from the corresponding verb }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mel}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - (LR:372 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 mel}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
-). But it may also be added to a stem with a nominal rather than verbal meaning, as when }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 nil}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 friend}{\lang2057\cgrid0  yields }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nilme}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 friendship}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:378): here -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 me}{\lang2057\cgrid0  can be seen to correspond to the English abstract ending -}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 ship}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . In the case of #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ind
\'f3me}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , the ending seems to develop the sense of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 indo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 heart}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 mood}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 will}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (as a faculty) into an abstract *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 state of heart}{\lang2057\cgrid0  = }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 will}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (as full abstract: }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 purpose}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). }{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [According to VT43:16, Tolk
ien in a note dating from 1957 derived }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 ind\'f3me}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  from }{\i\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 in-i-d}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  "mind, inner thought" and defined it as "settled character, also used of the 'will' of Eru".]}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 l\'famesse}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , noun in locative: }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 in [the] hour}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 on [the] hour}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . This is the sole word in the text before us tha
t displays the normal, well-known locative ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 sse}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , which is important, since this demonstrates that the strange "locative" (?) forms }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 cemende}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
Erumande}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (q.v.) }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 coexisted}{\lang2057\cgrid0  with the normal locative in -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 sse}{\lang2057\cgrid0 : Tolkien had evidently not dropped one in favor of the other. }{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
[VT43 argues that -}{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 de}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  is simply an allomorph of -}{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 sse}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 .] }{\lang2057\cgrid0 Notice that the locative can denote "location" in }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 time}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  as well as in space. Removing the ending leaves us with }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 l\'fame}{\lang2057\cgrid0  for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 hour}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , a word that is also attested by itself, though in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0  with a somewhat different gloss: LR:370 lists an undefined stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 lu}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, whence Quenya }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 l\'fame}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 time}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. Yet this word is also attested with the meaning }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 hour}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , in the famous greeting }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 elen s\'edla l\'famenna omentielvo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  "a star shines upon the hour of the meeting of our wa
ys" (so in WJ:367; the form Frodo delivers in LotR has ...}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 l\'famenn' omentielvo}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , a vowel being elided, and the translation offered goes }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 a star shines upon the hour of our meeting}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 ). An earlier version of this greeting, quoted and referenced in the entry -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mma}{\lang2057\cgrid0  below, even has locative }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 l\'famesse}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (rather than allative }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 l\'famenna}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ) just as in the text before us. \endash  As for the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 derivation}{\lang2057\cgrid0  of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 l\'fame}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , it incorporates the same ending -}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 me}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as in #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ind\'f3me}{\lang2057\cgrid0  above. As we demonstrated in the relevant entry, the suffix -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 me}{\lang2057\cgrid0  may be used to 
form abstracts; in this case it is used to derive a noun denoting something intangible. The stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 lu}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - is not itself defined, but for another word denoting a period of time that is derived by means of the ending -
}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 me}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , cf. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 l\'f3me}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 night}{\lang2057\cgrid0  from primitive }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 do3m\'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:355). }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 L\'fame}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  would be the later form of a primitive word *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 l\'fbm\'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mal}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , conjunction }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 but}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . A wholly new word, for which no etymology can be offered. Known bases like }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 mbal}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - in LR:372 and }{
\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 smal}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -  in LR:386 could have yielded a Quenya word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mal}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as far as phonology is 
concerned. However, neither base seems to have a suitable meaning (the former is undefined but yields the Quenya words }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 malle}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 street}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ambal}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 shaped}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 stone}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 flag}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , while the latter base is defined }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 yellow}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
; it is very difficult to imagine any semantic connection between this and a conjunction }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 but}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). We should probably be looking for a simpler stem *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 mal}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
-  instead, for semantic reasons apparently unconnected to the "extended" base }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 malat}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 gold}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (PM:366), though this base and }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 smal}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
- }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 yellow}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0  could actually both be elaborations of a root with precisely the form *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 mal}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -. }{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
[VT43:23 presents some thoughts about possible etymologies of }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 mal}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 , for instance that it could be a short ablative of }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 m\'e1}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
 "hand" and therefore signifying "away from one hand" = "on the other hand". I do not think I am insulting anyone if I say this is extremely speculative, but I can offer no really plausible etymology myself.] }{\lang2057\cgrid0 \endash  The word for }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 but}{\lang2057\cgrid0  so far used by post-Tolkien writers is }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e1n}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:375 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ndan}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
-) or with a short vowel }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nan}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (as in LR:72, in F\'edriel's Song: }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nan \'faye s\'e9re indo-ninya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 but my heart resteth not}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
). Whether Tolkien decided to drop this earlier conjunction altogether in favor of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mal}{\lang2057\cgrid0  cannot be determined at this stage; since no Eldarin word for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 but}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 occurred in any source that was published during Tolkien's lifetime, he would in principle be "free" to change this word as often as he pleased. Why he might have wanted to drop }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e1n}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nan}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  as the word for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 but}{\lang2057\cgrid0  can only be speculation. It may be noted, however, that }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e1n}{\lang2057\cgrid0  can also be interpreted *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 I am}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, sc. the copula }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0  with the first person pronominal ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. (This is a tentative observation, since because of the scarcity of published material we know very little of how Tolkien would conjugate the verb "to be". However, in VT40:31 Christopher Gilson interprets the form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e1re}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  occurring in the early poem }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Narqelion}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0  with a third person pronominal ending, which would suggest that }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 can indeed receive the normal pronominal suffixes.) As for the form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nan}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , it may be that Tolkien wanted to reserve this word as a preposition *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 back}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
: This is the meaning of the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ndan}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, LR:375, and the same entry in Etym also lists a Quenya prefix }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nan}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 backwards}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. A conjunction }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mal}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , wholly distinct from }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nan}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , would be completely unambiguous. (It would seem that Tolkien came up with ever new words for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 but}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  in Quenya; one late source reproduced in VT41:13 has }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'f3}{\lang2057\cgrid0 .) }{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [And now VT43:23 adds yet other words for "but": }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 one}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{
\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 on}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 ono}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 anat}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 .]}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Mar\'eda}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , fem. name: }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Mary}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The "Quenya" form of the name is transparently based on the Latin form and pronunciation \endash 
 not surprising in light of Tolkien's love for Latin, not least in its capacity as the language traditionally used in Catholic liturgy. The names }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Mar\'eda}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Y\'e9sus}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 occurring in this rendering of }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Hail Mary}{\lang2057\cgrid0  represent the first
 known cases of Tolkien using non-Eldarin, "real-world" elements in a Quenya text. We do know cases of Tolkien rendering "real-world" names into Quenya by their meaning, e.g. Eadwine (Edwin) = }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Herendil}{\lang2057\cgrid0  *}{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Fortune}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 friend}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:364 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kher}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -). However, he did n
ot attempt to render "Mary" by its meaning (which is in any case uncertain; the spelling }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Mariam}{\lang2057\cgrid0  occurring in the Greek text of the Gospel of Luke points to a Semitic original }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Maryam}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , older variant of }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Miryam}{\lang2057\cgrid0  = English Miriam; one suggested interpretation is
 "Rebellious One", but by New Testament times it was probably a traditional name used with little thought of whatever meaning it once conveyed). To Tolkien, using a Latin-based form of a pre-existing name in a Quenya text may not have represented a great 
leap; after all, he sometimes spoke of Quenya as the Elven-Latin (see LotR, Appendix F) and likened the status of Quenya in Middle-earth to that of Latin in our own world: an ancient, august language of ritual. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 massamma}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , noun with pronominal ending: }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 our bread}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Concerning the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mma}{\lang2057\cgrid0  for exclusive }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 our}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, see separate entry below. The word for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 bread}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is here #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 massa}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , though both the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Qenya Lexicon}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (QL:59) and the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:372 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 mbas}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -) give }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 masta}{\lang2057\cgrid0  instead. Yet in PM:404, reproducing a source written at
 some point in the fifties and probably early in the decade (cf. PM:395), a word for}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0  bread-giver}{\lang2057\cgrid0  appears as }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mass\'e1nie}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . This seems to presuppose #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 massa}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  as the word for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 bread}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , allowing us to conclude that the text before us is post-}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . In PM:404, Tolkien also mentioned }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
lenn-mbass }{\lang2057\cgrid0 as the combination that produced Sindarin }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lembas}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 journey-bread}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (cf. the entry for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 lembas}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in the }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Silmarillion}{\lang2057\cgrid0  Index). Hence the stem was still thought of as }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 mbas}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, though the form of the actual noun }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 bread}{\lang2057\cgrid0  had been adjusted. T
he primitive form would be *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mbass\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , which may also be represented as *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 mbaS-\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 esselya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  regarding }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 esse}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 ). While often adjectival, the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is also common in the case of nouns denoting inanimate objects. The stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 mbas}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
- itself means (at least according to the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ) }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 knead}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , which in the case of the words for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 bread}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 would refer to the kneading of the dough. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 mbas}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - is evidently related to }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 masag}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 knead}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
make soft by rubbing, kneading, etc.}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:371). Probably both stems should be seen as elaborated variants of a simpler root *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 mas}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -. 
\par -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mma}{\lang2057\cgrid0  possessive pronominal ending, exclusive }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 our}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , occurring in the words }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1taremma}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 our Father}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 and }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 massamma}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 our bread}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . This ending as such is previously unattested, but it has precisely the form we would expect it to have. It ha
s long been recognized that pronominal endings denoting }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 possession}{\lang2057\cgrid0  generally correspond to pronominal endings denoting the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 subject}{\lang2057\cgrid0  of a verb, the former ending in the vowel -}
{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and the latter in -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (-}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). For instance, the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thy}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 your}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (as in}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0  esselya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thy name}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , q.v.) corresponds to the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ly\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thou}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (as in }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 hiruvaly\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thou shalt find}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in Nam\'e1ri\'eb). Since the ending for exclusive }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 we}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mme}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (as in }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 vamme}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 we won't}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in WJ:371), people had already deduced that the pronominal suffix for exclusive }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 our
}{\lang2057\cgrid0  would be -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mma}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
; it is nonetheless nice to have this confirmed (demonstrating that Tolkien's languages are indeed sufficiently symmetrical for intelligent extrapolation to be of some value). In a sense, the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mma}{\lang2057\cgrid0  for }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 our}{\lang2057\cgrid0  was already attested, but with an inclusive rather than exclusive meaning. It occurs in an early LotR manuscript in the sentence }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 eleni silir l\'famesse omentiemman}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, "the stars shine on the hour of our meeting" (RS:324). Since }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 omentiemman}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 of our meeting}{\lang2057\cgrid0  here means the meeting of the parties involve
d, one of them talking to the other, "our" is here }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 inclusive}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. Perhaps Tolkien did not make any distinction between inclusive and exclusive "our" (and by implication "we") at this time. However, this greeting came to be worded }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 elen s\'edla l\'famenn' omentielmo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  "
a star shines upon the hour of our meeting" in the first published edition of LotR, the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mma}{\lang2057\cgrid0  being changed to *-}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lma}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (here with the genitive ending: -}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lmo}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ), the latter denoting a specifically }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 inclusive}{\lang2057\cgrid0  "our": By now, the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mma}{\lang2057\cgrid0  had probably had i
ts meaning limited to exclusive "our" only. Later still, in the revised edition of LotR, Tolkien changed }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 omentielmo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 of our meeting}{\lang2057\cgrid0  to }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 omentielvo}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  of the same meaning, but this incorporates a specifically }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 dual}{\lang2057\cgrid0  "our" and does not imply that *-}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lma}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as such had been rejected.}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
 [The assumption that }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 omentielvo}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
 includes a dual form of "our" is based on information from Humphrey Carpenter's edited version of Tolkien's letters, but it is unclear whether this was a lasting idea, or indeed whether or not Carpenter may ha
ve misunderstood whatever manuscript he had before him. There are apparently late manuscripts in which }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 omentielvo}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  is explained as containing an }{\i\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 inclusive}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
 "our" rather than a dual ending.]}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 m\'f3nalyo}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , noun with pronominal ending inflected for genitive: }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 of thy womb}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thy}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  (concerning which see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 esselya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ) is here combined with the genitive ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 o}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , producing -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lyo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (for **-}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lyao}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ) }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 of thy}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ... Removing the endings leaves #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 m\'f3na}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as the word for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 womb}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, not previously attested. Not much can be said about it except observing that the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , when not adjectival, often occurs in words denoting inanimate things. The word would seem to require a stem *}{
\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 mon}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - (or *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 smon}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 mbon}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -). #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 M\'f3na}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 could conceivably be connected to the undefined stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 m\'f4}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - which yields words havin
g to do with "labour" or toiling (LR:373), if the bringing forth of children is perceived as such: In English at least, the verb }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 labour}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is used in connection with giving birth.
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 na}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , optative particle denoting a }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 wish}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (or indeed a prayer). The relevant syntax
 has already been outlined. Nothing certain can be said about the origin of this particle (it must be distinct from the preposition }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 na}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 to}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 towards}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  listed in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , LR:374 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 na}{\lang2057\super\cgrid0 1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -). If it can be related to any published element, it must be the verb }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 is}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (as in Nam\'e1ri\'eb, cf. LR:374 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e2}{\lang2057\super\cgrid0 2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
- where this base is said to be the "stem of verb 'to be' in Q"; see also QL:64). If we see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 na}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as the imperative }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 be!}{\lang2057\cgrid0  we can make sense of the phrase }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
na aire esselya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , which could be interpreted *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 be holy thy name}{\lang2057\cgrid0  
= hallowed be thy name. It is interesting to notice that in one manuscript now in the Bodleian (MS Tolkien 21, fol. 2v), Tolkien observed that the wishing-particle }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nai}{\lang2057\cgrid0  means }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 be it that}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , comparing it to }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 is}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and "}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Nam\'e1rie}{\lang2057\cgrid0  'be well', 'be in well-being' = Farewell." So }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nam\'e1
rie}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 na}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 be}{\lang2057\cgrid0  + }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 #m\'e1rie}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 [in] well-being}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (the latter would be an abstract formation derived from }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 m\'e1ra}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 good}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , LR:371 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 mag}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
-). However, the "be!" interpretation cannot be made to fit the other examples, where the particle is used in conjunction with finite verbs. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Aranielya na tuluva}{\lang2057\cgrid0  obviously cannot be analysed as *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
thy kingdom be will come}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . An entirely speculative theory of how an imperative #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 na}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 be!}{\lang2057\cgrid0  could have evolved into a general optative particle: Originally, }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 na aire esselya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  was intended to mean *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 be holy thy name}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as outlined above. However, this construction was later reinterpreted as a nominal sentence }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
aire esselya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 holy [is] thy name}{\lang2057\cgrid0  with an optative particle }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 na}{\lang2057\cgrid0  prefixed to turn a declarative sentence into a wish or a prayer. This reinterpr
etation made speakers feel free to use }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 na}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in conjunction with }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 any}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 declarative sentence, also sentences incorporating finite verbs. From now on, you could take a complete sentence like }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aranielya tuluva}{\lang2057\cgrid0  *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thy kingdom will come}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 and turn it into a wish/prayer by inserting }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 na}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in front of the verb. (A further development would allow the omission of the subject of the sentence, leaving only the object of the finite verb: }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
na care ind\'f3melya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 wish-that [one] does thy will}{\lang2057\cgrid0  \endash  unless, as we speculated above, }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 care}{\lang2057\cgrid0  itself can be taken as an impersonal form *}{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 one does}{\lang2057\cgrid0 .)
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e1sie}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , interjection }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 amen}{\lang2057\cgrid0 .  The first element could be }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0  "is" (see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 na}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 above for references), while #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 sie}{\lang2057\cgrid0  may be an abstract formation based on the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 si}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 this, here, now}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:385); #}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 sie}{\lang2057\cgrid0  could then mean "this [situation, matter]". }{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [According to VT43:24, }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 sie}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  appears as an }{\i\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 adverb}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
 "thus" in one late manuscript, ca. 1968. Whether this is relevant for the obviously much earlier }{\i\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 Lord's Prayer}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  manuscript cannot be determined, but }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 sie}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
 = "thus" would also make sense in the context.] }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 N\'e1sie}{\lang2057\cgrid0  must be assumed to have the same meaning as Hebrew }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 `amen}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , and the latter was used as an affirmative interjection }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 so it is!}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 that is true! }{\lang2057\cgrid0 rather than simply optative }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 so be it!}{\lang2057\cgrid0  It does not necessarily refer to what is merely wished for, but to what 
}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 is}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , what is true; Hebrew }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 `amen}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is indeed related to the word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 `emeth}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 truth}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (older *}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 `amint}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). Interpreting the Quenya word in this light, I tend to conclude that }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e1-sie}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is literally }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 [so] is this}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . }{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
[Or perhaps rather }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e1}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  - }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 sie}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  = "[this] is so", if we accept the gloss of }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 sie}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
 as "thus"; the meaning remains the same.] }{\lang2057\cgrid0 (For the fronting of the verb in exclamations, cf. Fingon's cry before the Nirnaeth Arnoediad: }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Auta i l\'f3m\'eb!}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , translated }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
the night is passing }{\lang2057\cgrid0 in the text of }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Silmarillion}{\lang2057\cgrid0  Ch. 20, but in the Quenya exclamation the verb }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 auta}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 is passing}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is placed before its subject.) *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 N\'e1 sie}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is then written in one word as a pseudo-interjection }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e1sie}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , but the fact that }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 does not become }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 z}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , as it regularly does between vowels, gives away that this is not a "genuine" compound. \endash  If }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e1sie}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 were to have more strictly optative meaning, }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 so be it!}{\lang2057\cgrid0  rather than indicative }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 this is so}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , we might have expected #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 na}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 be!}{\lang2057\cgrid0  rather than }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 is}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (see the entry }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 na}{\lang2057\cgrid0  above regarding the word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nam\'e1
rie}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ).
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'edsi}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 women}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , the nominative plural of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'eds}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 woman}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The plural of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'eds
}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is also attested in MR:213, but there it appears as }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nissi}{\lang2057\cgrid0  instead. Similar, though not wholly identical forms occur in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Under the stem }{
\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ini}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 female}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , a Quenya noun }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'ed}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 female}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 woman}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is listed (LR:377). However, in the entry for the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'ee}{\lang2057\super\cgrid0 1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 woman}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (of which }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ini}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
- seems to be a variant with stem-vowel prefixed) it is said that }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'ed}{\lang2057\cgrid0  was an "archaic and poetic" word only, the current word for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 woman}{\lang2057\cgrid0  being rather }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nis
}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nisse}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , pl. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nissi}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in both cases (LR:377). This agrees with the entries }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 nis}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - (LR:378) and }{
\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ndis}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - (LR:375). It is suggested that }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 nis}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - is an elaboration of }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'ee}{\lang2057\super\cgrid0 1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - and }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 
ini}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, while }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ndis}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - is in turn a "strengthening" of }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 nis}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -. In the entry }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ndis}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
- (LR:375), Tolkien indicates that Q }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nisse}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 woman}{\lang2057\cgrid0  comes from primitive }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ndis-s\'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . This might seem to indicate that an ending -}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (the precise meaning of which is difficult to pin down) has been added to the stem. On the other hand, we can also understand the primitive form as being *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 ndiS-\'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, the doubling of the }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0  representing a medial fortification; the primitive ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0  added to this fortified stem would here be feminine. The formation of primitive }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ndis-s\'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 woman}{\lang2057\cgrid0  from the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ndis}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - is similar to }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 bess\'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 wife}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  from the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 bes}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - (LR:352). Whatever the precise etymology, in this scenario the Quenya descendant of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ndis-s\'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0  was }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nisse}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , which was apparently normally shortened to }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nis}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . This would represent **}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 niss}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , the final }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ss}{\lang2057\cgrid0  being simplified to }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0  since Quenya cannot normally have a double consonant finally; but in the plural form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nissi}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , where 
the double consonant was not final because of the plural ending, it naturally persists. So far we have discussed the scenario of the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . As already mentioned, in MR:213 the plural }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 women
}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is still }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nissi}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , but in this post-LotR source the singular is given as }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'eds}{\lang2057\cgrid0  with a long vowel (as if it were influenced by the archaic word }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'ed}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). The text of the Lord's Prayer seems to presuppose the same singular, but here the plural is }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'edsi}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , formed simply by adding the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 : there is no hint of any stem-variation. The plural }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'edsi}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is most surprising, for a single intervocalic }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0  ought to become voiced to }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 z}
{\lang2057\cgrid0 , in turn becoming }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . So why do we not see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'eds}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 woman}{\lang2057\cgrid0  pl. **}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'edzi}{\lang2057\cgrid0 /}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'edri}{\lang2057\cgrid0  just as we have }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 olos}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 dream}{\lang2057\cgrid0  pl. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 olozi}{\lang2057\cgrid0 /}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 olori}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 in UT:396? May Tolkien at this stage have imagined that }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'eds}{\lang2057\cgrid0  pl. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'edsi}{\lang2057\cgrid0  represents earlier *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'ed\'fe}{\lang2057\cgrid0  pl. *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n
\'ed\'fei}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , since }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0  from earlier }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'fe}{\lang2057\cgrid0  never becomes }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 z}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
?  (Cf. for instance }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nause}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 imagination}{\lang2057\cgrid0  from older }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nau\'fee}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , LR:378 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 nowo}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -; no form **}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nauze}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , **}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 naure}{\lang2057\cgrid0  arose, evidently because intervocalic }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0  was voiced to }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 z}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 bef
ore }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'fe}{\lang2057\cgrid0  became }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ; the voicing rule had ceased to function when new }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0 'es developed from }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'fe}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
.) If }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'eds}{\lang2057\cgrid0  were to represent earlier Quenya *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'ed\'fe}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , this would require that the primitive word had a shape quite different from what is suggested in the }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Whatever the case, the re-emergence of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nissi}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 as the plural form in a late source (MR:213) would seem to indicate that Tolkien had changed his mind back again, reviving the plural he had used in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. (Hence, writers should probably let the plural of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'eds}{\lang2057\cgrid0  be }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nissi}{\lang2057\cgrid0  rather than }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'edsi}{\lang2057\cgrid0 .)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang2057\cgrid0 \tab -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 o}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , a genitive ending here occurring thrice, in the words }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 God's}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , 
}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruanno}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 of grace}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 m\'f3nalyo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 of thy womb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (nominative forms }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eru}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruanna}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 m\'f3nalya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  \endash  the latter two examples confirm that when it is added to a word ending in -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, the genitive suffix -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 o}{\lang2057\cgrid0  displaces this final vowel; cf. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Vardo}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Calaciryo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as the genitive of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Varda}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Calacirya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in Nam\'e1ri\'eb). According to WJ:368, this genitive ending is to be referred to the "ancient adverbial element" }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ho}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, the basic meaning of which seems to be }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 from}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (the point of view being outside "the thing, place, or group [left]"; cf. the entry }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 3O}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
from, away, from among, out of}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , LR:360). The Quenya ending is said to descend from Primitive Quendian -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 h\'f4}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , an enclitic suffixed to nou
n stems; this position was "the usual place for the simpler 'prepositional' elements in PQ" (WJ:368). This -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 h\'f4}{\lang2057\cgrid0  produced Common Eldarin -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'f4}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , "since medial }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 h}{\lang2057\cgrid0  was very early lost without trace in CE", and with the shortening of the long final vowels, the Quenya genitive ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 o}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 arose. As explained by Tolkien in WJ:368-369, this genitive properly refers to }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 point of origin}{\lang2057\cgrid0  more than "ownership" (for the latter, good Quenya would rather use the possessive-adjectival case in -}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 va}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). It is often useful to bear in mind that the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 o}{\lang2057\cgrid0  descends from an element meaning }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 from}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, for sometimes this meaning can still be discerned in the use of the genitive in Quenya. In a phrase like }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i y\'e1ve m\'f3nalyo}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 the fruit of thy womb}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, the idea is obviously not that the womb somehow }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 owns}{\lang2057\cgrid0  the "fruit", but that the "fruit" }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 proceeded from}{\lang2057\cgrid0  the womb. (Cf. also the "ablativic" use of the genitive in the word }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Oioloss\'ebo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 from Mount Everwhite}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in Nam\'e1ri\'eb, though for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 from}{\lang2057\cgrid0  Quenya would normally use the regular ablative in -}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 llo}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ; see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulcullo}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ).
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ontaril}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , noun }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 mother}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or more literally }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 begetter}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, not previously attested but made up from familiar elements. In the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , a verb }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 onta}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 beget}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is derived from the stem }{
\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ono}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - of similar meaning (LR:379; this is evidently a stem-vowel prefixed variant of }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'f4}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , which stem is also defined }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 beget}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
: LR:378). }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Onta}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - would represent primitive *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ont\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - or *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 onot\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -; this is one of the cases where the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 t
\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  functions only as a verb-former and adds nothing to the meaning of the stem. Two derived agental nouns are actually listed in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ontaro}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }
{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 begetter}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 parent}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and a corresponding feminine form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ontare}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (the fact that the latter is said to be feminine evidently implies that }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ontaro}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is masculine; the endings -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 o}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0  are masculine/feminine counterparts in Quenya). Yet 
in his Hail Mary translation Tolkien did not use }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ontare}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , but an alternative feminine form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ontaril}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The feminine ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 il}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is attested in only a few other Quenya words: }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 amil}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 mother}{\lang2057\cgrid0  derived from a stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 am}{\lang2057\super\cgrid0 1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - (LR:348 \endash  }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mamil}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in UT:191 is perhaps a hypocoristic variant) and }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tavaril}{\lang2057\cgrid0   }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 female dryad}{\lang2057\cgrid0  from the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 t\'e1war}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 - (LR:391). Cf. also Old Noldorin }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kh\'edril}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 lady}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:364 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kher}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -). The simplest agental form in -}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is perhaps not gender-specific: The primitive endings -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ro}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 re}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (cf. WJ:371 regarding the former) w
ere masculine and feminine, respectively, but they would have merged as -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\lang2057\cgrid0  already in Common Eldarin, since final short -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 o}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 were lost very early. However, the primitive endings also appeared in long variants -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'f4}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , and where they occurred the f
inal vowel indicating gender would still be present in Quenya, though now short: Hence in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0  the words for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 begetter}{\lang2057\cgrid0 /}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 parent}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 are }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ontaro}{\lang2057\cgrid0  m. and }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ontare}{\lang2057\cgrid0  f. Even so, we have relatively few examples of nouns including the long masculine ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ro}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (a
ll of them in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ), and the word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ontare}{\lang2057\cgrid0  itself seems to be the sole example of the feminine ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 re}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. It may be that Tolkien decided to drop these endings and rather assume that the primitive personal/agental endings -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ro}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (m.) and -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 re}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (f.) had merged as -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
r}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in Quenya, with no indication of sex; if it is desirable to express gender, one must add a secondary ending to -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , like masc. -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 on}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or fem. -}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 il}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . (Cf. masc. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tavaron}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and fem. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tavaril}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as the words for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 dryad}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in LR:391 s.v. }{
\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 t\'e1war}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -.) Hence we have }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ontaril}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as the word for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 begetter}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 mother}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in the text before us. 
\endash  The plural gender-neutral word }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 parents}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ontari}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (evidently misread as "ontani" in LR:379) occurred in an early version of Treebeard's greeting to Celeborn and Galadriel, but it was changed to }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nostari}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as in the published LotR, Tolkien later noting that }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nosta}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - means }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 beget}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . (SD:73; in earlier "Qenya", this verb meant }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 give birth}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 instead; see LT1:272 or QL:66.) This change was made as LotR was being finished, suggesting that the Hail Mary translation predates this time \endash  or we would perhaps have seen *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nostaril}{\lang2057\cgrid0  instead of }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ontaril}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . However, it should be noted that the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ono}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 beget}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 give birth to}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 was still valid in the post-LotR period, as is evident from WJ:413 reproducing a source dating from ca. 1960. Even so, the use of the word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ontaril}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 may provide a hint that our text was written about the time Tolkien was finishing LotR (say, after the two first volumes had been published, but before he made some final, minute revisions in the last volume \endash  like changing }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
ontari}{\lang2057\cgrid0  to }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nostari}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as recorded in SD:73).
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 quanta}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , adjective }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 full}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . This word is attested at all stages of Tolkien's long evolution of Quenya; it occurs both in the Qenya Lexicon of 1915 (QL:78 s.v. }{
\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 qntn}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 qata}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ), in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0  of the mid-thirties (LR:366 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kwat}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
-, which was an added entry) and in such a post-LotR source as the essay }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Quendi and Eldar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  of ca. 1960 (in the phrase }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 quanta sarme}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 "full writing", VT39:8). In the two first sources, the spelling used is of course }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 qanta}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kwat}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - from which this adjective was derived in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0  was not further explained or even defined there. However, in }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Quendi and Eldar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 Tolkien shed more light on this root (WJ:392). He "theorized" that it had originally occurred in a simpler form }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kwa}{\lang2057\cgrid0 : "This 
stem evidently referred to 'completion'. As such it survives as an element in many of the Eldarin words for 'whole, total, all', etc. But it also appears in the form *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kwan}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, and cannot well be separated from the verb stem *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kwata}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , Q[uenya] }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 quat}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - 'fill'." The adjective }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 quanta}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 full}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  "cannot well be separated" either, and this verbal stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kwata}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , extension of }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kwa}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , is clearly the same stem as }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kwat}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 - in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (another case of slightly inconsistent representation of stems; see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eruo}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). If }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kwat(a)}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is primarily a verbal stem }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 fill}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , it could have a primitive past participle *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kwatn\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 filled}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (-}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e2}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  being a primitive past participle ending; see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aistana}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). If }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 quanta}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 full}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is to be referred to *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
kwatn\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 filled}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , this old past participle may then have developed into an adjective. For a probable parallel case, cf. Quenya }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 melda}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
beloved}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 dear}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ; the glosses make it clear that this is to be taken as an adjective. However, the primitive form Tolkien probably meant to be *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 meln\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, which would simply be the past participle }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 loved}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , formed from the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 mel}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 love (as friend)}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:372). *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Kwatn
\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  may have metathesized to *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kwant\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  at an early stage; cf. another example of the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  being added to a stem ending in a voiceless stop: From 
}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 stak}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 split}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 insert}{\lang2057\cgrid0  come both }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 stank\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 stakn\'e2}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , these primitive forms being cited as the sources of the Quenya adjective (and/or noun?) }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 sanka}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 cleft}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 split}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (LR:388). Despite }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 stakn\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  being mentioned last, it may be that this is the oldest form, early turning into }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 stank\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ; Quenya }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 sanka}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 clearly descends from the latter form. The immediate ancestor of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 quanta}{\lang2057\cgrid0  must likewise have been *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kwant\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. However, it is eminently possible that this is also to be taken as the ulterior form, not just as a metathesized variant of *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kwatn\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . There are other examples of adjectives being derive
d by means of nasal infixion and the suffixing of -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , such as primitive }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tung\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 taut, tight}{\lang2057\cgrid0  vs. the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 
tug}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - (LR:394; it is of course possible that }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 stank\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  above is meant to be a similar formation rather than a metathesized form of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 stakn\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
). Our favorite theory must probably be that *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kwant\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is an adjective }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 full}{\lang2057\cgrid0  derived from }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kwat}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
- by means of the same devices; in such a case we shall not have to postulate a semantic development from past participle to adjective (}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 filled}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 full}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ).
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e1men}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , pronoun }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 for us}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (?), }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 on our behalf}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (?). As indicated in the summary analysis above, #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 men}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  ought to be enough to express }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 for us}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (#}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 me}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 we}{\lang2057\cgrid0  + the dative ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
). If the last part of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e1men}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is indeed #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 men}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 for us}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , we are left with a prefix #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
- that is wholly obscure. Conceivably the prefix tilts the meaning of the simple dative }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 for us}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in the direction of }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 on our behalf}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ; nothing more can be said of it. }{
\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [VT43:33 suggests that }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e1}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 - is derived from }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 ara}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  'along side', and analyzes }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e1men}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  as }
{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e1}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  "for" + }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 men}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  "us". As the authors of the article ought to know and indeed write elsewhere, }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 men}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  is a }{
\i\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 dative}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  form "for us", not simply "us". The prefix }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e1}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
- still seems superfluous as long as the dative ending is attached to the pronoun. It is possible, though, that }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e1}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  as a preposition "for" or "on behalf of" governs the dative case, much like }{
\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 \'fa}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  "without" governs the genitive case. If so, the "prefix" }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e1}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is actually a preposition rather than a prefix proper, though a pronoun has glued itself to it. An earlier version of the Quenya Ave Maria actually had the two-word reading }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e1 men}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
: VT43:27. Perhaps, then, we could also have phrases like *}{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e1 i Eldan}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  "on behalf of the Elf".]}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'ed}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , adverb }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 now}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . It is previously attested in Nam\'e1ri\'eb (}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 an s\'ed Tintall\'eb...m\'e1ryat ortan\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
for now the Kindler...has uplifted her hands}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ), in LR:47/SD:310 (}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ilya s\'ed maller raikar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , with interlinear translation }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 all now roads [are] bent}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
), and in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The latter source lists the word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'ed}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as a derivative of the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 si}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 this}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 here}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 now}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:385); this stem thus refers to }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 present}{\lang2057\cgrid0  position in time or space. (In Sindarin, the word }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 si}{\lang2057\cgrid0  \endash  often occurring in lenited form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 hi}{\lang2057\cgrid0  \endash  covers both }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 here}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 now}{\lang2057\cgrid0 .) The }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0  also lists }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 sin}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as an alternative form of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'ed}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , and an example from LR:47 (}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 sin atalante}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , in SD:310 }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edn atalante}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ) would seem to indicate that the variant }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 sin}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edn}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
) is used when the next word begins in a vowel. Compare the distribution of }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{\lang2057\cgrid0  vs. }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 an}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in English. However, this is not the case in the Hail Mary text, which has }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'ed ar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  rather than *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 sin}{\lang2057\cgrid0 /}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edn ar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 now and}{\lang2057\cgrid0 .
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edra}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , adverb }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 today}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The first element is obviously to be derived from the same stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 si}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 this}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 here}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 now}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:385) as }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'ed}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 now}{\lang2057\cgrid0  above. This stem manifests as a prefix }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'ed}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - (with a long vowel) also in the word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edmen}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 here}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in F\'edriel's Song (LR:72); this is transparently }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'ed}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 this}{\lang2057\cgrid0  + }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 men}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 place}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:372 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 men}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
-). In light of this example, it would be tempting to analyse }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edra}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 this day}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . However, the final element #-}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ra}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 cannot be related to any known word for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 day}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . A form *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edre}{\lang2057\cgrid0  could incorporate }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e9}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, mentioned in LotR, Appendix D: "A 'day' of the sun [the Elves] called }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e9}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and reckoned from sunset to sunset." As the final element of a compound, }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e9}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is shortened to -}
{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 re }{\lang2057\cgrid0 (-}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ); for instance, Appendix D also cites }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mettar\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as the name of the last day of the year (clearly }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 metta}
{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 end}{\lang2057\cgrid0  + }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e9}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 day}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , cf. LR:373 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 met}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, tho
ugh Tolkien may originally have thought of the final element as }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ar\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  rather than }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e9}{\lang2057\cgrid0 : see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ilaur\'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
). When making their own translation of the Lord's Prayer, Patrick Wynne and Carl F. Hostetter indeed coined precisely the word *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edre}{\lang2057\cgrid0  to translate "today" (VT32:
8). Yet Tolkien's manuscript definitely seems to read }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edra}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and not *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edre}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (which, by the way, would clash with }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edre}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 river}{\lang2057\cgrid0 : LR:385 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 sir}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -). While the possibility that Tolkien accidentally wrote }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{\lang2057\cgrid0  intending }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 cannot wholly be ruled out, it is possible to plausibly explain the word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edra}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as it stands. The final element may be seen simply as the adjectival ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ra}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (primitive -}
{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aire}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). An adjective/adverb }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edra}{\lang2057\cgrid0  would not }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 etymologically}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 mean strictly "today", it would only somehow refer to }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 present}{\lang2057\cgrid0  time or place, but by convention it could be used specifically for "today". It is interesting to notice that in early "Qenya" at least, the word for }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 tomorrow}{\lang2057\cgrid0  was }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 enwa}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (QL:34; no word for "tomorrow" is known from later sources). This was from the beginning conceived as a demonstrative stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 e(n)}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 - to which is added what seems to be an adjectival ending. In the context of later Quenya, }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 enwa}{\lang2057\cgrid0  could be interpreted as incorporating the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 en}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 over there}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 yonder}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:356) which "of time points to the future" (LR:399 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -); to this is added the ending -}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 wa}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (primitive -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 w\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ) known from adjectives, adverbs and prepositions (see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 im\'edca}{\lang2057\cgrid0  concerning primitive }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 hekw\'e2}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 ). }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Enwa}{\lang2057\cgrid0  by its etymology only refers vaguely to that which is "over there" or "in the future", but by convention it could be used specifically for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 tomorrow}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. An adjectival/adverbial formation }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edra}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 today}{\lang2057\cgrid0  based on the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 si}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
- (having to do with the present rather than the future) could be wholly parallel to this. Yet one should generally be wary about basing conclusions regarding Quenya on the early "Qenya" material, and an even better interpretation may be found: The word }
{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e9}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 day}{\lang2057\cgrid0  mentioned in LotR, Appendix D may reflect a stem *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
- (stems consisting of a single consonant would not be unheard of, cf. the "demonstrative stem" }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - in LR:385). In }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e9}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , this *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 - would be combined with the primitive (abstract) ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , hence *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > Quenya }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e9}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. Without this ending we could have *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'ee}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - "this-day", to which is added the simple adjectival ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (WJ:382), resulting in the primitive "adjective" *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'ee-r-\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > Q }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edra}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , in Quenya used as an adverb "today".
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edv'}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , elided form of *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edve}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , conjunction or preposition: }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 as}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, apparently when comparing with something close to the speaker (contrast }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tambe}{\lang2057\cgrid0  below). }{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [VT43 confirms that the full form of the word is }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edve}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
.] }{\lang2057\cgrid0 The first element is }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'ed}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 this}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 here, now}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as in }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edra}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 above. This is prefixed to what is evidently the preposition }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ve}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 as}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 like}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, persisting through all stages of Tolkien's development of Quenya (QL:101, Nam\'e1ri\'eb, MC:215). The Sindarin word #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 be}{\lang2057\cgrid0  which occurs in the King's Letter (SD:129, there with a suffixed article: }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ben}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ) is apparently a cognate of Quenya }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ve}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . While translated }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 in the}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in the phrase }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ben genediad Drannail}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  = }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 in the Shire reckoning}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (calendar), the context makes it clear that }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 in the}{\lang2057\cgrid0  here means *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 according to the}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Sindarin #}
{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 be}{\lang2057\cgrid0  would be similar to the primitive form of this preposition; in Quenya the primitive form with }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 b}{\lang2057\cgrid0  instead of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 v}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 may be preserved in the word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tambe}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , see below.
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tambe}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , preposition: }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 as}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 in the same way as}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , apparently pointing away from the speaker (contrast *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edve}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  above). This may be }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tana}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 that}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:389 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ta}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -) prefixed to *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 be}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 as}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 like}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (see above), contracted to *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tan-be}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and then assimilated to }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tambe}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. Yet if this explanation is correct one may ask why }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edv}{\lang2057\cgrid0 [}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ] above does not appear as **}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 simbe}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 instead, contracted in the same way from *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 sina-be}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 sina}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 this}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, UT:305). It would seem that Quenya word formation is not entirely symmetric; in the case of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edv}{\lang2057\cgrid0 [}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ] a prefix based directly on the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 si}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 - is used, while in the case of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tambe}{\lang2057\cgrid0  the first element might seem to be based on the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 derived}{\lang2057\cgrid0  form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tana}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 rather than the naked root }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ta}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -. Perhaps **}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 t\'e1ve}{\lang2057\cgrid0  paralleling }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edv}{\lang2057\cgrid0 [}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
] would be equally possible? Such a speculative form cannot be recommended to writers, though. It may be noted that in one quite early "Qenya" text reproduced in MC:215-216, the word for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 that}{\lang2057\cgrid0  appears as }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tanya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  rather than }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tana}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tanya wende}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 that maiden}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Tanya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is best analysed as a root *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 tan}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - plus the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . If Tolkien (at least sometimes) imagined the demonstrative stem to be *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 tan-}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  rather than just }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ta}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, this might explain the form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tambe}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (< *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tan-be}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). Interestingly, the verb }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tana}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 to show, indicate}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and the noun }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tanna}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 sign}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , both from a source postdating the }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and indeed the LotR itself (MR:385), could very well reflect a demonstrative stem *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 tan}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -. (It may be noted that Christopher Tolkien in MR:385 refers to }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tana}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - as a }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 root}{\lang2057\cgrid0 .)
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tien}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , evidently dative pronoun }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 to them}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 for them}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . From the Cormallen Praise we know the word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 te}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 them}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . This may represent unstressed *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tai}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 those (ones)}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , a primitive plural pronoun formed (with the primitive plural ending -}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'ee}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i) }{\lang2057\cgrid0 from the demonstrative stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ta}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 that}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ; cf. Quenya }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ta}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 that}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 it}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:389). The connecting vowel }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0  may well turn up before the dative ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  when it is added to a monosyllable ending in a diphthong, producing a form *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 taien}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Before another vowel, }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ai}{\lang2057\cgrid0  was reduced to }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  in Quenya, cf. for instance Q }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 leo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 shade}{\lang2057\cgrid0  from primitive }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 daio}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:354 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 day}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 -). Hence *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 taien}{\lang2057\cgrid0  could become *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 teen}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , but the sequence of two concomitant }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0 's was not durable, becoming }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ie}{\lang2057\cgrid0  by dissimilation. Hence the dative form of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 te}{\lang2057\cgrid0  can plausibly be }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tien}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . (For the development }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ee}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 > }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ie}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , cf. for instance }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lauri\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as the plural form of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 laur\'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 golden}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in Nam\'e1ri\'eb
: It has long been recognized that the plural form represents *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 laur\'ebai}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , unstressed final -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ai}{\lang2057\cgrid0  later becoming -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , but what would be *}
{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 laur\'ebe}{\lang2057\cgrid0  turned into }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 lauri\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  by dissimilation.)
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tuluva}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , future verb }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 will come}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The verb }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tul}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 come}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is well attested; in the }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0  it is listed in the first person aorist (}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tulin}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 I come}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ), derived directly from a stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 tul}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 come}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 approach}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 move towards (point of speaker)}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (LR:395, cf. WJ:368). The verb here occurs with the future-tense ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 uva}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , as in }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 firuvamme}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (q.v.) The future tense }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tuluva}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 was already attested in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Silmarillion}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , there with the prefix }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 en}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 re-}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 again}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , H\'fa
rin crying }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aur\'eb entuluva}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 day shall come again}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , after the Nirnaeth Arnoediad (}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Silmarillion}{\lang2057\cgrid0  Ch. 20).
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tulya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , verb }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 lead}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , or literally evidently *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 cause to come}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . This must be seen as a causative form of the verb }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tul}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 come}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tuluva }{\lang2057\cgrid0 above). The }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0  also lists a primitive causative formation, }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tult\'e2}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 make come}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , whence Quenya }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tulta}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 send for}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 fetch}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 summon
}{\lang2057\cgrid0 : LR:395 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 tul}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -. This is probably the best example we have of the verbal ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 t\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ta}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 being causative (though sometimes it functions simply as a verb-former). }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Tulya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, however, shows another ending, and it also has a meaning somewhat different from that of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tulta}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 -: the latter only has to do with causing something to come to(wards) oneself, while }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tulya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - evidently means to }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 lead}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 direct}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  in general, irrespective of the position of the speaker (despite the gloss assigned to the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 tul}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, quoted under }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tuluva}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 above). How, then, are we to analyse }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tulya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ? The ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (primitive -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 y\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , or by another spelling -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 j\'e2}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 ) is sometimes simply a verb-former that adds nothing to the meaning of the stem, an eminent example of this being Quenya }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 sir}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - vs. Old Noldorin }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 sirya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
-: Both verbs mean }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 flow}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , but while the Quenya form represents the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 sir}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 flow}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 with no added elements, the synonymous Old Noldorin verb is derived by means of the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 that in this case cannot be seen to cause any semantic change whatsoever (LR:385). Yet in other cases this ending may take on a causative meaning. In WJ:411 the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 tele}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is glossed }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 close}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 end}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 come at the end}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The most immediate Quenya descendant of this was the intransitive verb }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tele}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 finish}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 end}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Yet this had a }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 transitive}{\lang2057\cgrid0  counterpart }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 telya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 finish}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 wind up}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 conclude}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . It is not surprising, then, that the same ending can be used to derive a transitive verb }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tulya }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
lead}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 make come}{\lang2057\cgrid0  from the intransitive verbal stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 tul}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 come}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ya}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  may not necessarily connote transitivity, but it is interesting to notice that the verb }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 pour}{\lang2057\cgrid0  retains the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ya}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  in the past tense }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulyane}{\lang2057\cgrid0  only if the verb is used in a transitive sense. If "pour" is intransitive, the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  drops out and the past tense is }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulle}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , apparently formed directly from the stem (LR:396 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ulu}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -).
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facaremmar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , plural noun with pronominal ending: }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 our sins, our misdeeds}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The pronominal ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mma}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , here follo
wed by the plural ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , denotes exclusive }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 our}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1taremma}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). Removing the endings (pronominal and plural), we are left with }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facare}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -. It cannot be definitely determined whether the noun }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 sin}{\lang2057\cgrid0  should be #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facare}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (#}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facar\'eb}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 ) or just #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 : The }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facare}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - could
 be part of the word proper, but it could also be merely a connecting vowel inserted to avoid an impossible consonant cluster, just as in }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1taremma}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Indirect evidence }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 may}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 support #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facare}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as the independent form: In MC:222, we have }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 elenillor}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as the plural ablative of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 elen}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 star}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 . Notice the }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\lang2057\cgrid0  that is inserted between }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 elen}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and the case ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 llor}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (for plural ablative): It seems that the case ending is added to the normal, "nominative" plural }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 eleni}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 stars}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (attested by itself in Nam\'e1ri\'eb). So if a noun ending in a 
consonant is to receive an ending that would produce an impossible consonant cluster, and the whole form is to be plural, one does not use the normal connecting vowel }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (as in }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1taremma}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , or }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Elendilenna}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in PM:401). Instead one may construct the simplest }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 plural}{\lang2057\cgrid0  form of the noun, in -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, and use this plural ending as a connecting vowel before adding the case ending. If the noun }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 sin}{\lang2057\cgrid0  were #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , the same procedure could have been used here: plural *}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facari}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , to which the pronominal ending would be added, producing *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facarimmar}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (with double plural marking, }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
r}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , just as in }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 elen}{\b\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 llo}{\b\ul\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). The fact that we do not here see *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facarimmar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , but }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facaremmar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , may then suggest that no extra connecting vowel is needed \endash  sc. that the naked noun }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 sin}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is not #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 ending in a consonant, but #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facare}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0  would represent primitive *-}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , known to be an abstract ending (see }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 esselya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). As for the elements #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facare}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is made up of, see the verb }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facarer}{\lang2057\cgrid0  below.}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facarer}{\lang2057\cgrid0  plural verb }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 sin}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 trespass}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The verb has the plural ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\lang2057\cgrid0  to agree with its 
plural subject ("}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 those}{\lang2057\cgrid0  who sin/trespass against us"). This form includes the verb }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 car}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 do}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , concerning which see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
care}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ; as discussed in that entry, we would rather expect the plural aorist to be *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facarir}{\lang2057\cgrid0  according to the system Tolkien used in both earlier an
d later sources. Anyhow, this verb is obviously related to the noun #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facare}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 sin}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 misdeed}{\lang2057\cgrid0  discussed above. The prefix }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'fa}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - sometimes functions as a negation }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 not}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 un}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 in}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, but the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}
{\lang2057\cgrid0  adds that it is "usually with bad sense" (LR:396 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ugu}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 umu}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -). 
Here the "bad sense" is dominant; in this case, the prefix does not indicate negation, but something }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 wrong}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The noun #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'fa-care}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is quite literally }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
mis-deed}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , and #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - is the corresponding verb: }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 to commit a misdeed}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 to do wrong}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 to sin}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 .}{\lang2057 
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facarindor}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , plural noun }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 sinners}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 evildoers}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ; singular #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facarindo}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. This is an agental from of the verb }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - discussed above. This word provides our third attestation of the agental ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 indo}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , with the same meaning as English -}{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 er}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0  has }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 melindo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 lover}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , a derivative from the verb }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 mel}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 love}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:372 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 mel}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -). In LotR we find the word #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 colindo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 bearer}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, attested as a compounded plural: as part of the Cormallen Praise, Frodo and Sam were hailed as the }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Cormacolindor}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Ring-bearers}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . (The underlying verb #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
col}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kol}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 bear}{\lang2057\cgrid0  has never been attested by itself, but cf. MR:385 stating that }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kolla}{\lang2057\cgrid0  means }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
borne}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 worn}{\lang2057\cgrid0 .) In the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 indo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is suggested to be a specifically }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 masculine}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  agental ending, since masc. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 melindo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is contrasted with fem. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 melisse}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as the word for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 lover}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (and o
f course, both of the }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Cormacolindor}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or Ring-bearers were male). However, in the context of this prayer, the plural }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facarindor}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is probably not intended to carry any implications of gender.
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulcullo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  noun in ablative, }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 from evil}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (or conceivably }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 from [the] evil one}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, as discussed above). This is the sole occurrence of the ablative ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 llo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 from}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in this text, but it is well attested elsewhere (Nam\'e1ri\'eb
, MC:221-222, Plotz Letter). Little can be said about the origin of this ending; it is tempting to assume that the final -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 o}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is somehow related to }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ho}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
from}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , the origin of the Quenya genitive ending (see -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 o}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). Unlike the case ending, the noun #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulcu}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 evil}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 is not previously attested, though it is obviously related to the adjective }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulca}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 bad}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 wicked}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 wrong}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  (QL:97). }{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [Interestingly, it now turns out that some earlier versions of the prayer actually had }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 ulcallo}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  instead of }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 ulcullo}{
\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 .] }{\lang2057\cgrid0 Though not found in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , this early "Qenya" adjective was also valid in later Quenya; it occurs as part of a compound in a LotR manuscript: }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 henulka}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 evil-eyed}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . (SD:68 \endash 
 this is part of Treebeard's denunciation of the Orcs; in the published LotR this Quenya word is not included, though the Ent still calls the Orcs "evil-eyed".) Some very early ideas about the derivation of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulca}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 that are set out in QL:97 are probably best ignored within the context of later Quenya. In the later period of Tolkien's conception, the adjective }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulca}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and the noun #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulcu}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 must probably be derived from a stem *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 uluk}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - (or conceivably *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 guluk}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - since primitive initial }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 g}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - was lo
st without trace in Quenya, but by opting for *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 uluk}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - we allow for the possibility that the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ulug}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
- in LR:396 is a variant of it; the latter stem is not defined but yields words for such "evil" concepts as }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 hideous}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 horrible}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 monster}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
). The adjective }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulca}{\lang2057\cgrid0  would then descend from primitive *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 uluk\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulk\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , sc. this stem with the adjectival ending -}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (WJ:382). The noun #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulcu}{\lang2057\cgrid0  would represent *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 uluk\'fb}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
: two-syllable stems sometimes form nouns by reduplicating the stem-vowel a third time, as a final vowel, but in that position it is long. Cf. such primitive words as }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 galad\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 tree}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:357 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 galad}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -) or }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 kyelep\'ea}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 silver}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (Letters:426, cf. LR:367 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 kyelep}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 -). \endash  By another theory, the primitive form should rather be *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulku}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , which by itself would produce Q *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulco}{\lang2057\cgrid0 : Final short -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 u}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  in the primitive language had become -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 o}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in Quenya (cf. primitive }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tundu}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 hill}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > Q }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tundo}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , LR:395 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 tun}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -). This *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulco}{\lang2057\cgrid0  would then appear as #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulcu}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - only before endings, hence ablative }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulcullo}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , since the original -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 u}{\lang2057\cgrid0  became -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 o}{\lang2057\cgrid0  only when }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 final}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Yet this se
ems to be a less probable theory. The change of earlier final short -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 u}{\lang2057\cgrid0  to -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 o}{\lang2057\cgrid0  parallels the change of earlier short -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 i}{\lang2057\cgrid0  to -}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . From examples like }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facarer}{\lang2057\cgrid0  instead of *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facarir}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 we have already argued that around 1950, Tolkien was in a "phase" where he carried through the changed quality of the short final vowels }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 everywhere}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, even where the vowels are not final because some ending follows. He may have intended that the vowels were changed in all positions by analogy with the simplex forms, where the "final" vowel re
ally was final and did change for phonological reasons. So if he had imagined a development *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulku}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > Q *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulco}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , he would probably have used *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulcollo}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  as the ablative form as well. When he wrote }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulcullo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  instead, this may indicate that he intended the nominative to be simply #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulcu}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . }{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
[I think my reasoning as such was sound, but according to VT43:24, the simplex may after all be }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 ulco}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  with a stem-form }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 ulcu}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
-. At least there is one version of the prayer that had }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 va ulco}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  instead of }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 ulcullo}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 , this }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 va}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
 apparently being a preposition "from" that was used instead of the ablative ending -}{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 llo}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 .] }{\lang2057\cgrid0 \endash  If #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulcu}{\lang2057\cgrid0  does not mean }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 evil
}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as an abstract, but rather }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 (the) evil one}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , the final -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 u}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 may not just be the stem-vowel reduplicated. Rather it would be the same masculine/animate ending as in }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 H\'e9ru}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , q.v. Then #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulcu}{\lang2057\cgrid0  could be derived from the adjective }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulca}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 evil}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , falling into an established Quenya pattern. Regarding the word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Ainu}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, actually a borrowing from Valarin, Tolkien stated: "It was from this }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 ainu}{\lang2057\cgrid0  that in Quenya was made the adjective }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 aina}{\lang2057\cgrid0  'holy', since according to Quenya derivation }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 ainu}{\lang2057\cgrid0  appeared to be a personal form of such an adjective" (WJ:399). If #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulcu}{\lang2057\cgrid0  does mean }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 evil one}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, it could likewise be a "personal" form: a noun derived from the adjective }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulca}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Yet #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ulcu}{\lang2057\cgrid0  may be an abstract }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 evil}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 after all; as mentioned above, the word would probably either receive the article or be capitalized if it were to refer to the devil. True, Quenya abstracts in -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 u}{\lang2057\cgrid0  are very rare (abstract nouns typically end in -}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0  instead), but abstracts of this shape may occur where }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 u}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is also the stem-vowel: Cf. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nuru}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 death}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (LR:377 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 \'f1gur}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, primitive *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'f1gur\'fb}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 with reduplicated and suffixed stem-vowel). We know that this is a true abstract, since Tolkien contrasted it with the capitalized form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Nuru}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , stated to be Death "per
sonified" (within Tolkien's mythos a name of the Vala usually called Mandos).}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  [If }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 ulcullo}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  is actually }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 ulco}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  with stem }{
\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 ulcu}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 -, it is a quite rare formation, especially for a word that is to have an abstract meaning. }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 Ulco}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 ulcu}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
- presupposes a form *}{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 ulku}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  in early Common Eldarin.]}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'fasahtienna}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , noun in allative: }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 into temptation}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . The allative ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nna}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 may simply indicate "movement towards" (as stated by Christopher Tolkien in UT:432 s.v. }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Eldanna}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ), but if Tolkien based his Quenya translation of the Lord's Prayer o
n the normal wording of this prayer, this ending here implies not only }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 to}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 towards}{\lang2057\cgrid0  but }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 into}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. The allative has the same force in the phrase }{\b\lang2057 mannar Valion}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 into the hands of the Lords}{\lang2057  in F\'edriel's Song (LR:72; -}{\b\lang2057 nna}{\lang2057  becomes -}{\b\lang2057 nnar}{\lang2057 
 in the plural). This allative ending is obviously related to the prepositional stem }{\scaps\lang2057 n\'e2}{\lang2057\super 1}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 to}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 towards}{\lang2057 
 (LR:374). Tolkien stated that "prepositional" elements were normally suffixed to noun stems in Primitive Quendian (WJ:368, see the entry -}{\b\lang2057 o}{\lang2057  for the quotation), so Quenya -}{\b\lang2057 nna}{\lang2057  would presu
mably descend from }{\scaps\lang2057 n\'e2}{\lang2057\super 1}{\lang2057 - in this suffixed position. (The Quenya ending, with double }{\b\lang2057 nn}{\lang2057 , would seem to be strengthened or nasal-infixed; the Telerin ablative still had simple -}{
\b\lang2057 na}{\lang2057 , Tolkien equating Quenya }{\b\lang2057 l\'famenna}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 upon the hour}{\lang2057  with Telerin }{\b\lang2057 l\'famena}{\lang2057 : WJ:367 vs. 407.) \endash  Removing the ending we are left with #}{
\b\lang2057 \'fasahtie}{\lang2057  as the noun }{\i\lang2057 temptation}{\lang2057 . The form most similar to this in the published corpus would be }{\b\lang2057 sahta}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 marred}{\lang2057 , attested in the phrase }{\b\lang2057 
Arda Sahta}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 Arda Marred}{\lang2057  (MR:405, changed by Tolkien to }{\b\lang2057 Arda Hastaina}{\lang2057 , MR:408, 254). }{\lang2057\cgrid0 
Yet it seems difficult, semantically, to get from "mar, marred" to "temptation". Nothing certain can be said about the etymology of #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'fasahtie}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , except that it evidently incorporates the negative prefix }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'fa}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, but some speculation may be offered: The Qenya Lexicon lists a verb }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 saka}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 pursue}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 look for}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 search}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (QL:81).  If a stem *}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 sak}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 search}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 was still valid at a much later stage of Tolkien's conception, there could be a primitive causative verb *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 sakt\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 make search}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (as for the sometimes causative verbal ending 
-}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 t\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tulya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  regarding primitive }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tult\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -). *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Sakt\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - would produce Quenya *}{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 sahta}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -. With the prefix }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'fa}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, used in the same "bad sense" as in }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facarer}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 sin}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 trespass}{\lang2057\cgrid0  above, we may interpret the verb *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'fasahta}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - as }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 make }{\lang2057\cgrid0 (someone else) }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 seek what is bad}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, which is a plausible etymology for a verb }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 tempt}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . With the infinitival or gerundial ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ie}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (as in }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 en-yali\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, UT:317), this verb could indeed produce an abstract #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'fasahtie}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 temptation}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . It is, however, also possible to plausibly explain this word without resorting to the e
arly "Qenya" material: Tolkien may have intended #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'fasahtie}{\lang2057\cgrid0  to be a derivative of the stem }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 stag}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 press}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
compress}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:388). This entry in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0  lists no actual verb directly reflecting the meaning of the stem, but there could well be a primitive verb *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 stagt\'e2}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 - (this would be yet another case of the ending -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 t\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0  functioning as a mere verb-former, adding nothing to the meaning of the root \endash  see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ontaril}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
). This *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 stagt\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - might later become *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 stakt\'e2}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - > Quenya *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'feahta}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 sahta}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -. If this means 
}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 to press}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , we might again have a gerund *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 sahtie}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , meaning }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 pressing}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 pressure}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. By adding the prefix }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'fa}{\lang2057\cgrid0 -, full of sinister connotations, we would arrive at #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'fasahtie}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, literally referring to some kind of "evil pressure". This may plausibly be a way of expressing }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 temptation}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . }{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [These 
speculations turn out to be quite accurate, which is frankly more than I would have expected. VT43:22-23 reveals that one version of the prayer had, not }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 \'fasahtienna}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 , but the shorter form }{
\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 sahtienna}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 . This was derived from a stem }{\scaps\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 thag-}{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 oppress}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 crush}{
\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 press}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  which is plainly a mere variant of the }{\scaps\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 stag}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 press}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
compress}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  listed in Etym. For variation between aspirates like }{\i\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 ph}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 th}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 kh}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
 and consonant clusters in }{\i\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 -, like }{\i\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 sp}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 -, }{\i\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 st}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 -, }{\i\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 sk}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 -, compare }{
\scaps\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 spal-, spalas-}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  as variants of }{\scaps\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 phal-, phalas- }{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 (LR:387). The final form }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 \'fasahtie}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
 Tolkien referred to another stem }{\scaps\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 saka}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 -, which however did not mean "search" as it had in the early Qenya Lexicon; Tolkien defined it as "draw, pull" and indicated that }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 sahta}{
\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 - is a verb }{\i\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 induce}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 , whence the prefixed gerund }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 \'fasahtie}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  = }{\i\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 inducement to do wrong}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 .]

\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , relative pronoun }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 which}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 that}{\lang2057\cgrid0 : }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 l\'famesse ya firuvamme}{\lang2057\cgrid0  *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
in the hour that we shall die}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Nothing can be said of the etymology of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ; the Primitive Elvish form would probably be similar. This is our first attestation of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ya}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  as a separate word in a text that is indisputably Quenya. Previously we knew }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ya}{\lang2057\cgrid0  by itself only from the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Arctic}{\lang2057\cgrid0  sentence published in }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
The Father Christmas Letters}{\lang2057\cgrid0 : }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 M\'e1ra mesta an ni v\'e9la tye ento, ya rato nea}{\lang2057\cgrid0  \endash  translated }{\lang2057 "good-bye until I see you next, and I hope it will be soon", more lite
rally probably *"...which I hope will be soon". While this comes from a work that has few connections to Tolkien's Middle-earth mythos (indeed a work that does not belong to Tolkien's serious literary production at all), it has long been recognized that t
he "Arctic" sentence represents some kind of Quenya or "Qenya". In LotR-style Quenya, }{\b\lang2057 ya}{\lang2057  has up till now only been attested with a case ending; Nam\'e1ri\'eb has }{\b\lang2057 yassen}{\lang2057  for }{\i\lang2057 wherein}{
\lang2057  (or *}{\i\lang2057 in which}{\lang2057 , the ending for plural locative being suffixed to }{\b\lang2057 ya}{\lang2057 ). Some, indeed, have assumed that }{\b\lang2057 ya}{\lang2057 - is simply the form the relative pronoun }{\b\lang2057 i}{
\lang2057  (q.v.) assumes before an ending, and that }{\b\lang2057 ya}{\lang2057  would not appear as an independent form. This theory must now be abandoned; the manuscript before us clearly demonstrates that not only does }{\b\lang2057 ya}{\lang2057  ap
pear independently but }{\b\lang2057 ya}{\lang2057  and }{\b\lang2057 i}{\lang2057  coexist as Quenya relative pronouns, both of them occurring here. This, of course, raises the question of when to use }{\b\lang2057 ya}{\lang2057  and when to use }{
\b\lang2057 i}{\lang2057 . Are they interchangeable? I suspect that one would always use }{\b\lang2057 ya}{\lang2057 - when case endings are to be added; }{\b\lang2057 i}{\lang2057  is "indeclinable" in its capacity as article (LR:361 s.v. }{
\scaps\lang2057 i}{\lang2057 -), and this may be true when it functions as a relative pronoun as well. But when }{\b\lang2057 i}{\lang2057  and }{\b\lang2057 ya}{\lang2057  occur by themselves, it may seem that }{\b\lang2057 i}{\lang2057  refers to }{
\i\lang2057 sentients}{\lang2057  (or perhaps more generally }{\i\lang2057 animates}{\lang2057 ), while }{\b\lang2057 ya}{\lang2057  refers to }{\i\lang2057 inanimates}{\lang2057  and }{\i\lang2057 situations}{\lang2057 
 (the Arctic sentence would be an example of the latter). In short, }{\b\lang2057 i}{\lang2057  vs. }{\b\lang2057 ya}{\lang2057  may represent a distinction roughly similar to English }{\i\lang2057 who}{\lang2057  vs. }{\i\lang2057 which}{\lang2057 , }{
\i\lang2057 what}{\lang2057 . Another theory, still not disproved, may be that }{\b\lang2057 i}{\lang2057  is used when it is the }{\i\lang2057 subject}{\lang2057  of the following relative sentence (e.g. *}{\b\lang2057 Orco i tir\'eb Elda}{\lang2057  }{
\i\lang2057 an Orc that watches an Elf}{\lang2057 ), while }{\b\lang2057 ya}{\lang2057  is the }{\i\lang2057 object}{\lang2057  (*}{\b\lang2057 Orco ya tir\'eb Elda}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 an Orc that an Elf watches}{\lang2057 ).}{\lang2057\cgrid0 

\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 y\'e1ve}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , noun }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 fruit}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . As indicated above, Tolkien's manuscript may seem to read }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 yave}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 with a short vowel, but since there just might be an accent merged into the letter above, we read }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 y\'e1ve}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as in all other attestations of the word. These include the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Silmarillion}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  Appendix (where }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 y\'e1v\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 fruit}{\lang2057\cgrid0  occurs as the very last entry) and the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 : LR:399 s.v. }{
\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 yab}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - lists the same word with the same gloss, and the root itself is also glossed "fruit". The QL (p. 105) indicates that in Tolkien's early "Qenya", this word appeared as }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 y\'e1va}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  instead, and there was also a verb }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 yav}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 bear fruit}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (listed in the form }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 yavin}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, perhaps intended as the third person aorist; in later Quenya it would be first person instead). If such a verb was still valid in Tolkien's later incarnations of Quenya, }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 y\'e1ve}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 could be seen as being basically or originally an abstract formation derived from this verb. Cf. a Quenya word like }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e1ne}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 straying, wandering}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , formed from the verbal stem }
{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 ran}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 wander}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 stray}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:383) by means of the same devices: lengthening the stem vowel and adding -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 . Such abstracts may (later?) take on a more concrete meaning, denoting what is produced by the action rather than the action itself; hence the word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'fate}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , formed from the stem }{
\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 nut}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 tie}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 bind}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , does not mean }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 tying}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 binding}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 but rather }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 bond}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 knot}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:378). In a similar fashion, the meaning of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 y\'e1ve}{\lang2057\cgrid0  may have wandered from full abstract }{
\i\lang2057\cgrid0 fruit-bearing}{\lang2057\cgrid0  to the concrete meaning }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 fruit}{\lang2057\cgrid0 .
\par }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Y\'e9sus}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , masc. name: }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Jesus}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . As in the case of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Mar\'eda}{\lang2057\cgrid0  for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Mary}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, Tolkien's "Quenya" form of the name seems to be based on the pronunciation of the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Latin}{\lang2057\cgrid0  form, but spelt according 
to the normal Roman conventions for the representation of Quenya. The underlying Semitic form (probably something like }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Y\'eash\'fb\'b4}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , that could have been Quenyarized as *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Y\'e9hyu}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 ) may not have been considered at all, nor did Tolkien try to render it by its meaning ("Yahweh's Salvation"). The name is not fully Quenyarized; intervocalic }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0  would normally have become voiced to 
}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 z}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , later becoming }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in the dialect of the Noldor (e.g. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 olozi}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 olori}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as the plural of }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 olos}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 dream}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , UT:396; cf. our theory that }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aire}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 holy}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , q.v., wa
s originally meant to represent primitive *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 gaisi}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). If }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Y\'e9sus}{\lang2057\cgrid0  were a true Quenya word, it would have to represent older *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Y\'e9\'feus}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, since }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0  altered from }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'fe}{\lang2057\cgrid0  never became }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 z}{\lang2057\cgrid0  > }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'edsi}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 ). But since this is not meant to be an inherited Quenya word, such diachronic considerations are irrelevant; synchronically speaking the Latin pronunciation of }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Jesus}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 violates no rules of Quenya phonotax, and so it is used here. It would have been interesting to know how Tolkien would have }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 inflected}{\lang2057\cgrid0  this word, though. Would we have seen *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Y\'e9suss-}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  with double }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0  before an ending, e.g. genitive *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Y\'e9susso}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or dative *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Y\'e9sussen}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
? That would follow the pattern of a noun like }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 eques}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 saying}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 dictum}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , which becomes }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 equess}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
- before an ending: hence the plural }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 equessi}{\lang2057\cgrid0  in WJ:392. It is there said that this form is "analogical", evidently suggesting that very many words ending in -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 doubled this sound to -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ss}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - before endings (e.g. }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nissi}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as the more orthodox plural of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'eds}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 woman}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 ; see }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'edsi}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ), so new words in -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s}{\lang2057\cgrid0  tended to slip into the same pattern. Perhaps this would then also be applied to a borrowed name like }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
Y\'e9sus}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , so that a phrase like "the love of Jesus" would be *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Y\'e9susso melme}{\lang2057\cgrid0 .
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\fs32\lang2057\cgrid0 5. Summary: New insights on Quenya
\par 
\par }{\lang2057\cgrid0 In summary we can say that Tolkien's Quenya rendering of the Lord's Prayer and Hail Mary provides quite a few new insights, but there are also some mysteries. }{\lang2057 
The strange new "locative" or perhaps "comparative" case exemplified by the words }{\b\lang2057 cemende}{\lang2057  and }{\b\lang2057 Erumande}{\lang2057  is probably best ignored by writers until it is better understood: Tolkien's unpublishe
d writings, if they are eventually made available to scholarship, may throw more light on this form. }{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [According to VT43, this -}{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 de}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  is an allomorph of the regular locative ending -}{
\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 ss\'eb}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 , but I suspect that this shorter ending was not a lasting idea in Tolkien's ever-evolving conception. For clarity, writers should probably use the full ending -}{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 ss\'eb}{
\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 , where necessary inserting a connecting vowel before it.] }{\lang2057 The same goes for the preposition (?) }{\b\lang2057 han}{\lang2057  of uncertain meaning. }{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [It now appears that }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 han}
{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  means "beyond", but I think I would stick to the more well-known postposition }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 pella}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  for this meaning.] }{\lang2057 
Otherwise, the known Quenya vocabulary is enhanced by a whole string of new words, most of which offer no obscurities: }{\b\lang2057 aistana}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 blessed}{\lang2057 , #}{\b\lang2057 \'e1la}{\lang2057  imperative }{\i\lang2057 do not}{
\lang2057 , }{\b\lang2057 #aranie}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 kingdom}{\lang2057 , #}{\b\lang2057 apsen}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 forgive}{\lang2057  (with direct object of the matter that is forgiven, dative object of the person forgiven), }{\b\lang2057 
as}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 with}{\lang2057 , }{\b\lang2057 etelehta}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 free}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 release}{\lang2057 , *}{\b\lang2057 Eruanna}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 grace}{\lang2057  considered as }{\i\lang2057 God's gift
}{\lang2057 , }{\b\lang2057 ilaur\'eba}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 daily}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 everyday}{\lang2057  (adj.), }{\b\lang2057 im\'edca}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 among}{\lang2057 , #}{\b\lang2057 ind\'f3me}{\lang2057  noun }{\i\lang2057 will
}{\lang2057  }{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [according to VT43:16 }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 ind\'f3me}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  means "settled character, also used of the 'will' of Eru"}{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 ]}{\lang2057 , }{\b\lang2057 mal}{\lang2057  }{
\i\lang2057 but}{\lang2057 , #}{\b\lang2057 m\'f3na}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 womb}{\lang2057 , }{\b\lang2057 na}{\lang2057  optative particle, }{\b\lang2057 n\'e1sie}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 amen! so it is!}{\lang2057 , the strange form }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 r\'e1men}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , ?}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 for us}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , ?}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 on our behalf}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edra}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 today}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 s\'edv}{\lang2057\cgrid0 [}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 e}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ] and }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tambe}{\lang2057\cgrid0  both meaning }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 as}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 like}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (the 
former apparently comparing with something that is close, the latter with something remote), }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tien}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as the dative of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 te}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 them}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 tulya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 lead}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , the three related words #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facare}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 sin}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 misdeed}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 - verb }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 sin}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facarindo}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 sinner}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 evildoer}{
\lang2057 , #}{\b\lang2057 ulcu}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 evil}{\lang2057  as noun }{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [may actually be }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 ulco}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 ulcu}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 -]}{\lang2057 , #}{
\b\lang2057 \'fasahtie}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 temptation}{\lang2057 . There is also }{\b\lang2057 n\'edsi}{\lang2057  as an unorthodox plural of }{\b\lang2057 n\'eds}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 woman}{\lang2057 ; the plural }{\b\lang2057 nissi}{
\lang2057  found in other sources (both earlier and younger than the text before us) is probably to be preferred.
\par \tab More than ten of the words above cover meanings for which we had no Quenya translation before. Some of these words may, on closer scrutiny, yield further vocabulary items: if we have correctly analysed }{\b\lang2057 n\'e1sie}{\lang2057  as }{
\i\lang2057 (so) is this}{\lang2057 , we may isolate a word #}{\b\lang2057 sie}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 this}{\lang2057  referring to a situation (e.g. *}{\b\lang2057 i Elda carne sie}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 the Elf  did this}{\lang2057 ); the word }{
\b\lang2057 sina}{\lang2057  known from the phrase }{\b\lang2057 vanda sina}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 this oath}{\lang2057  in Cirion's Oath (UT:305, 312) may be }{\i\lang2057 adjectival}{\lang2057 
 only, modifying another word but not necessarily occurring by itself as in "the Elf did this". }{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [According to VT43, }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 sie}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
 may actually be an adverb "thus"; this word certainly has this meaning in a later source. However, }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 sie}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  = "thus" would also be a highly useful word that writers have often missed. }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
Sie}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  could also be used to translate "so". \endash  As for "this", it is possibly that }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 sin}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  is used by itself and }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 sina}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
 as an adjectival modifier: }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 Elda sina carn\'eb sin}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 , "this Elf did this.]}{\lang2057 
\par \tab This text confirms what the word }{\b\lang2057 mass\'e1nie}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 bread-giver }{\lang2057 in }{\lang2057\cgrid0 PM:404 suggests: in the fifties, Tolkien had decided that the Quenya word for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 bread}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  was to be #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 massa}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and not as in earlier sources}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0  masta}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Of course, both forms could very well coexist in the language, but in the }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
Etymologies}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 masta}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is both a noun }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 bread}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and a verb }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 bake}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (LR:372 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057\cgrid0 mbas}{
\lang2057\cgrid0 -). Writers can now use }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 masta}{\lang2057\cgrid0  for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 bake}{\lang2057\cgrid0  and #}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 massa}{\lang2057\cgrid0  for }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 bread}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , a
voiding the ambiguous forms.
\par }{\lang2057 \tab Some words are of particular value to writers. }{\b\lang2057 Im\'edca}{\lang2057  as an unambiguous word for }{\i\lang2057 among}{\lang2057  is a welcome addition to our vocabulary; so far writers have had to resort to }{\b\lang2057 imb
\'eb}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 between}{\lang2057 , but that is not quite the same. The new word }{\b\lang2057 mal}{\lang2057  for }{\i\lang2057 but}{\lang2057  fills no gap in our vocabulary, since we already had }{\b\lang2057 nan}{\lang2057  (or }{
\b\lang2057 n\'e1n}{\lang2057 , }{\b\lang2057 n\'e1}{\lang2057 ), but 
\par }{\b\lang2057 mal}{\lang2057  is perhaps to be preferred: For one thing it occurs in a source that is certainly younger than the sources that provide these other words for }{\i\lang2057 but}{\lang2057 , and as we have argued, }{\b\lang2057 mal}{\lang2057 
 may be less ambiguous than the alternatives (including the form }{\b\lang2057 n\'f3}{\lang2057  that turned up in VT41:13, since according to LR:379 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057 nowo}{\lang2057 - }{\b\lang2057 n\'f3}{\lang2057  is also a noun }{\i\lang2057 
conception}{\lang2057 , and in one sentence }{\b\lang2057 n\'f3}{\lang2057  even seems to be a preposition }{\i\lang2057 before}{\lang2057  \endash  see VT41:18). The verb }{\b\lang2057 tulya}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 lead}{\lang2057 
 is also useful; until now we have only had }{\b\lang2057 tulta}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 summon}{\lang2057 
, and though both words basically mean "make come" the latter form had the limitation that it only referred to movement towards the place of the speaker. Another highly useful word is }{\b\lang2057 as}{\lang2057  for }{\i\lang2057 with}{\lang2057 
 in the sense }{\i\lang2057 together with}{\lang2057 . So far it has been somewhat unclear what the Quenya for }{\i\lang2057 with}{\lang2057  really is. I have used and recommended }{\b\lang2057 yo}{\lang2057 ; in WJ:407 it occurs as a }{\i\lang2057 
prefix}{\lang2057  in the word }{\b\lang2057 yomenie}{\lang2057  (read *}{\b\lang2057 yomentie}{\lang2057 ?) }{\i\lang2057 meeting}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 gathering}{\lang2057  (of three or more coming from
 different directions). We seem to have an independent attestation of }{\b\lang2057 yo}{\lang2057  in SD:56, in one of the draft variants of Elendil's Oath: }{\b\lang2057 yo hildinyar}{\lang2057 , perhaps meaning *}{\i\lang2057 with my heirs}{\lang2057 
 (the final version in LotR \endash  volume 3, Book Six, chapter V \endash  simply reads }{\b\lang2057 ar hildinyar}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 and my heirs}{\lang2057 ). Though I think }{\b\lang2057 yo}{\lang2057  may indeed be one Quenya word for }{
\i\lang2057 with}{\lang2057 , at least at certain stages of Tolkien's ever-evolving vision, the new word }{\b\lang2057 as}{\lang2057  is certainly the best option for expressing this meaning now. (Moreover, }{\b\lang2057 yo}{\lang2057 
 may be ambiguous since this is conceivably also the genitive of }{\b\lang2057 ya}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 which}{\lang2057 , hence *}{\b\lang2057 yo}{\lang2057  = }{\i\lang2057 of which}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 whose}{\lang2057 . The locative }{
\b\lang2057 yassen}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 wherein}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 in which}{\lang2057  occurring in Nam\'e1ri\'eb demonstrates that the relative pronoun }{\b\lang2057 ya}{\lang2057  may receive case endings.)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang2057 News about }{\i\lang2057 pronouns}{\lang2057  would be very welcome in Tolkienian linguistics, since parts of the Quenya pronoun table remain rather obscure. We can now remove the asterisk from }{
\b\lang2057 emme}{\lang2057  as the emphatic pronoun for exclusive }{\i\lang2057 we}{\lang2057 , as well as from the related ending -}{\b\lang2057 mma}{\lang2057  for exclusive }{\i\lang2057 our}{\lang2057 . These forms had already been deduced, but }{
\b\lang2057 tien}{\lang2057  as the dative pronoun }{\i\lang2057 to/for them}{\lang2057  is unexpected; yet it seems to confirm that }{\b\lang2057 te}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 them}{\lang2057  represents *}{\b\lang2057 tai}{\lang2057  (}{\b\lang2057 tien}
{\lang2057  itself evolving from *}{\b\lang2057 taien}{\lang2057 , according to this theory).
\par It is interesting to observe that the prefix }{\b\lang2057 et}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 forth}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 out}{\lang2057  is expanded to }{\b\lang2057 ete}{\lang2057 - where an impossible consonant cluster would otherwise arise, as in }{
\b\lang2057 etelehta}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 free}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 release}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 let out}{\lang2057 . I have sometimes wondered how }{\b\lang2057 et}{\lang2057 - could be combined with a word like }{\b\lang2057 lelya}{
\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 go}{\lang2057  (WJ:362), since *}{\b\lang2057 etlelya}{\lang2057 - is not a possible Quenya word. While I actually pondered the possibility of a form **}{\b\lang2057 eltelya}{\lang2057 - with metathesis, it would seem that }{
\i\lang2057 go out}{\lang2057  (or }{\i\lang2057 go forth}{\lang2057 ) should rather be *}{\b\lang2057 etelelya}{\lang2057 -.
\par The verb }{\b\lang2057 \'facar}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 sin}{\lang2057  is valuable not only because it fills a gap in our vocabulary, but also because it provides an example of the negative prefix }{\b\lang2057 \'fa}{\lang2057 
- used on a verb: it conveys the idea of something wrong or bad (}{\b\lang2057 car}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 do}{\lang2057  > }{\b\lang2057 \'fa-car}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 do wrong}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 sin}{\lang2057 
). Some, like Nancy Martsch in her primer }{\i\lang2057 Basic Quenya}{\lang2057 , have assumed that }{\b\lang2057 \'fa}{\lang2057 - prefixed to verbs is used as a negation }{\i\lang2057 not}{\lang2057 . To be sure, 
this idea was not without any foundation; we know that }{\b\lang2057 \'fa}{\lang2057 - is used like this in Sindarin (as in Gilraen's }{\i\lang2057 linnod}{\lang2057  in LotR, Appendix A: }{\b\ul\lang2057 \'fa-chebin}{\b\lang2057  estel anim}{\lang2057  }
{\i\lang2057 I have kept no hope for myself}{\lang2057  or literally *}{\i\ul\lang2057 I do not keep}{\i\lang2057  hope for me}{\lang2057 , the verb *}{\b\lang2057 hebin}{\lang2057  [here lenited }{\b\lang2057 chebin}{\lang2057 ] apparently meaning *}{
\i\lang2057 I keep}{\lang2057 ). Indeed we have a }{\i\lang2057 Quenya}{\lang2057  attestation of }{\b\lang2057 \'fa}{\lang2057 - as a negation prefix in F\'edriel's Song, which seems to have }{\b\lang2057 \'faye}{\lang2057  as a negated form of }{
\b\lang2057 ye}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 is}{\lang2057  (LR:72: }{\b\ul\lang2057 \'faye}{\b\lang2057  s\'e9re indo-ninya}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 my heart resteth not}{\lang2057 , more literally }{\i\lang2057 my heart }{\i\ul\lang2057 is not}{
\i\lang2057  resting}{\lang2057 ?) However, F\'edriel's Song is not quite LotR-style Quenya, and the fact that the verb }{\b\lang2057 \'facar}{\lang2057 - means }{\i\lang2057 sin}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 do wrong}{\lang2057  rather than }{\i\lang2057 
not do}{\lang2057  (cf. }{\b\lang2057 car}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 do}{\lang2057 ) seems to indicate that we should avoid using }{\b\lang2057 \'fa}{\lang2057 - as a negation prefix on verbs. (It is, however, so used in the case of adjectives, cf. }{
\b\lang2057 \'fan\'f3tim\'eb}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 numberless }{\lang2057 or literally }{\i\lang2057 uncountable}{\lang2057  in Nam\'e1ri\'eb
.) If we want to negate verbs, other devices must be sought; the most straightforward solution would be to simply use the independent word }{\b\lang2057 l\'e1}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 not}{\lang2057  (LR:367 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057 la}{\lang2057 
-). This word is here attested as part of the negative command #}{\b\lang2057 \'e1la}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 do not}{\lang2057 .
\par The texts also provide new insights on Quenya grammar and syntax. It is interesting to notice how the imperative of a "basic" verb like #}{\b\lang2057 hyam}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 pray}{\lang2057  is constructed: the verb receives the ending -}{
\b\lang2057 e}{\lang2057  (reflecting the ending of an }{\b\lang2057 i}{\lang2057 -stem: }{\b\lang2057 hyame}{\lang2057  = *}{\b\lang2057 hyami}{\lang2057 -), and the imperative particle }{\b\lang2057 \'e1}{\lang2057  is placed in front of it to produce }
{\b\lang2057 \'e1 hyame}{\lang2057  = }{\i\lang2057 pray!}{\lang2057  The system so far used by many writers (including me) is to construct the imperative of such verbs simply by adding the ending -}{\b\lang2057 a}{\lang2057 
. This was in accordance with the examples }{\b\lang2057 ela!}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 see! behold!}{\lang2057  and }{\b\lang2057 heka!}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 be gone!}{\lang2057  from WJ:362, 364. It still seems possible that }{\i\lang2057 pray!}{
\lang2057  could simply be *}{\b\lang2057 hyama!}{\lang2057  However, the construction with }{\b\lang2057 \'e1}{\lang2057  plus stem in -}{\b\lang2057 e}{\lang2057  is perhaps to be preferred. It may be that Tolkien intended }{\b\lang2057 ela!}{\lang2057 
 and }{\b\lang2057 heka!}{\lang2057  as old, fossilized forms. After all, the same essay that provides }{\b\lang2057 ela!}{\lang2057  also exemplifies the }{\i\lang2057 negated}{\lang2057  form of the same imperative construction (in the phrase }{
\b\lang2057 \'e1va kare}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 don't do [it]!}{\lang2057  in WJ:371; this would correspond to a positive command *}{\b\lang2057 \'e1 kare}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 do [it]!}{\lang2057 ). In the case of the example }{\b\lang2057 \'e1
 vala}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 rule}{\lang2057  (}{\lang2057\cgrid0 WJ:404, not **}{\b\lang2057 \'e1 vale}{\lang2057 ), we must assume that }{\b\lang2057 vala}{\lang2057 - is itself an A-stem and therefore does not take the ending -}{\b\lang2057 e}{
\lang2057  (e.g. third person aorist }{\b\lang2057 vala}{\lang2057  rather than **}{\b\lang2057 vale}{\lang2057 ). The imperative of a "basic" verb like }{\b\lang2057 tir}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 watch}{\lang2057  should be *}{\b\lang2057 \'e1 tire}{
\lang2057  rather than **}{\b\lang2057 \'e1 tira}{\lang2057 , though a shorter imperative *}{\b\lang2057 tira!}{\lang2057  paralleling }{\b\lang2057 ela!}{\lang2057  and }{\b\lang2057 heka!}{\lang2057  is perhaps equally possible.
\par These texts also reveal another thing about Quenya imperative constructions: The imperative particle }{\b\lang2057 \'e1}{\lang2057 
 can receive pronominal suffixes denoting the object of the sentence (direct object in accusative or indirect object in dative), as in }{\b\lang2057 \'e1me etelehta}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 deliver us}{\lang2057 , }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'e1
men anta...massamma}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 give (to) us...our bread}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\lang2057 ("us" being denoted by the suffix #-}{\b\lang2057 me}{\lang2057 , #-}{\b\lang2057 men}{\lang2057 )
. The same goes for the negated form of the imperative particle, #}{\b\lang2057 \'e1la}{\lang2057  (as in }{\b\lang2057 \'e1la}{\b\ul\lang2057 me}{\b\lang2057  tulya}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 do not lead }{\i\ul\lang2057 us}{\lang2057 
). Presumably Tolkien's later variant of the word for }{\i\lang2057 don't}{\lang2057 , }{\b\lang2057 \'e1va}{\lang2057 , could also receive pronominal endings denoting the object of the prohibition.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang2057 \tab Another piece of news about the behavior of pronominal suffixes is that even finite verbs can receive a pronominal ending, denoting an object, that does }{\i\lang2057 not}{\lang2057 
 have to be preceded by another ending denoting the subject (}{\b\lang2057 apsenet}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 [we] forgive them}{\lang2057 ). The recently-published example }{\b\lang2057 karita}{\b\ul\lang2057 s}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 to do }{
\i\ul\lang2057 it}{\lang2057  (VT41:13, 17) demonstrated that infinitives}{\i\lang2057  }{\lang2057 
can receive object endings, and this can now be seen to be true of finite verbs as well. In all previous examples of verbs incorporating a pronominal ending denoting the object, it is preceded by another pronominal suffix denoting the }{\i\lang2057 
subject}{\lang2057  (e.g. one word from the Cormallen praise: }{\b\lang2057 laituvalmet}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 we [-}{\b\i\lang2057 lme}{\i\lang2057 -] shall bless them [-}{\b\i\lang2057 t}{\i\lang2057 ]}{\lang2057 
). Writers who choose to append pronominal endings to verbs should make sure that there can be no confusion as to whether the ending denotes the subject or the object; otherwise separate pronouns (rather than endings) should be employed.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang2057 The phrase }{\b\lang2057 quanta Eruanno}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 full of grace}{\lang2057  represents a hitherto unknown use of the genitive. It could surely be used in more mund
ane contexts as well, e.g. *}{\b\lang2057 yulma quanta neno}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 a cup full of water}{\lang2057  (}{\b\lang2057 n\'e9n}{\lang2057 , }{\b\lang2057 nen}{\lang2057 
-). The underlying idea is probably the use of the genitive in the sense "concerning" (as in }{\b\lang2057 Quenta Silmarillion}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 the Story of [= about, regarding, concerning] the Silmarils}{\lang2057 ). So perhaps }{\b\lang2057 
quanta Eruanno}{\lang2057  = }{\i\lang2057 full regarding grace}{\lang2057 , *}{\b\lang2057 quanta neno}{\lang2057  = }{\i\lang2057 full as far as water is concerned}{\lang2057 . It would be interesting to know if the genitive case can also be used }{
\i\lang2057 adverbially}{\lang2057  in connection with the related verb }{\b\lang2057 quat}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 fill}{\lang2057  (WJ:392), so that a sentence like "the Elf filled the cup with mead [}{\i\lang2057 miruv\'f3r\'eb}{\lang2057 
]" could be expressed as *}{\b\lang2057 i Elda quant\'eb i yulma miruv\'f3r\'ebo}{\lang2057  \endash  the genitive indicating the substance used to "fill" the direct object. (If this is not the case, the instrumental would probably be used instead: *}{
\b\lang2057 miruv\'f3renen}{\lang2057 .) It is even possible that the genitive can be used, not only with }{\b\lang2057 quanta}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 full}{\lang2057 , but also with its antonym }{\b\lang2057 lusta}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 empty}{
\lang2057 , e.g. *}{\b\lang2057 lusta neno}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 empty of water}{\lang2057 .
\par The wishing-particle }{\b\lang2057 na}{\lang2057  opens up certain vistas of expression that the formerly known particle }{\b\lang2057 nai}{\lang2057  does not cover. In all known examples, }{\b\lang2057 nai}{\lang2057 
 expresses a wish that is to be fulfilled in the }{\i\lang2057 future}{\lang2057 , and that only involves what a subject hopefully is to do to an object: }{\b\lang2057 Nai hiruvaly\'eb Valimar!}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 
Be it [that] thou wilt find Valimar!}{\lang2057  (Nam\'e1ri\'eb), }{\b\lang2057 nai tiruvantes}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 *may they keep it!}{\lang2057  (Cirion's Oath). While this remains an important Quenya wishing-formula, the particle }{\b\lang2057 na}
{\lang2057  is more flexible. It can be used to connect adjectives and nouns (}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 na aire esselya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 hallowed be thy name}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or literally *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 
wish-that holy [is] thy name}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). (Presumably this could also be expressed as *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nai nauva esselya aire}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , but this would place the fulfillment of the wish in the future.) }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Na}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  can be used in the case of a wish regarding what a subject hopefully is to do in the future, but no object needs to be involved: }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Aranielya na tuluva}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thy kingdom come}{
\lang2057\cgrid0  or }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 wish that thy kingdom will come}{\lang2057\cgrid0  (reworked from the declarative statement *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 aranielya tuluva}{\lang2057\cgrid0  }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 thy kingdom will come}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 simply by inserting the wishing-particle in front of the verb). This could }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 probably}{\lang2057\cgrid0  also have been expressed by means of the "traditional" formula *}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 nai aranielya tuluva}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (though all attested examples of this formula involves an object and not only a subject). Of particular interest is the peculiar construction }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 na care ind\'f3melya}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , apparently *}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 wi
sh-that [one] does thy will}{\lang2057\cgrid0 . Not only does this show that }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 na}{\lang2057\cgrid0  can be used with other tenses than the future (}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 care}{\lang2057\cgrid0  looks like an aorist) \endash 
 it also indicates that this formula can be used to express a wish about }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 what is to be done to an object}{\lang2057\cgrid0  without actually mentioning any subject. In effect we have a passive of sorts.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang2057 \tab The form }{\b\lang2057 aistana}{\lang2057  for }{\i\lang2057 blessed}{\lang2057  seems to tell us that though "derived" verbs, or A-stem verbs, normally form their past participles in -}{
\b\lang2057 ina}{\lang2057  (as in }{\b\lang2057 hastaina}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 marred}{\lang2057 , MR:254, 408), the shorter ending -}{\b\lang2057 na}{\lang2057  may be preferred when the resulting form would otherwise come to have the diphthong }{
\b\lang2057 ai}{\lang2057  in two concomitant syllables: hence not **}{\b\lang2057 aistaina}{\lang2057 . (Other verbs for which this may be relevant include }{\b\lang2057 laita}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 bless}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 praise}{\lang2057 
, }{\b\lang2057 naina}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 lament}{\lang2057 , }{\b\lang2057 taita}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 prolong}{\lang2057 , }{\b\lang2057 vaita}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 wrap}{\lang2057 : past participles *}{\b\lang2057 laitana}{\lang2057 
, *}{\b\lang2057 nainana}{\lang2057  [?], *}{\b\lang2057 taitana}{\lang2057 , *}{\b\lang2057 vaitana}{\lang2057 . A few other verbs containing }{\b\lang2057 ai}{\lang2057 , like }{\b\lang2057 faina}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 emit light}{\lang2057 
, seem by their meanings to be intransitive and could probably not have meaningful past participles.) \endash  As for the verb that underlies the form }{\b\lang2057 aistana}{\lang2057 , sc. #}{\b\lang2057 aista}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 to bless}{
\lang2057 , it seems to supersede }{\b\lang2057 aista}{\lang2057 - }{\i\lang2057 to dread}{\lang2057  in the }{\i\lang2057 Etymologies}{\lang2057  (LR:358 s.v. }{\scaps\lang2057 g\'e1yas}{\lang2057 
-), though as we have argued above, the ultimate derivation may be much the same. For the meaning }{\i\lang2057 to dread}{\lang2057  writers can rather use the verb #}{\b\lang2057 ruk}{\lang2057 - from a post-LotR source (first person aorist in WJ:415: }{
\b\lang2057 rukin}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 I feel fear or horror}{\lang2057 , said to be constructed with "from" \endash  sc. the ablative case? \endash  of the object feared). For the meaning }{\i\lang2057 bless}{\lang2057  we already had }{\b\lang2057 
laita}{\lang2057 - from the Cormallen Praise, but as we have argued, this is by its etymology rather *}{\i\lang2057 magnify}{\lang2057  and may often better be rendered }{\i\lang2057 praise}{\lang2057  (}{\lang2057\cgrid0 Letters:308; }{\lang2057 
cf. also the corresponding verbal noun in }{\b\lang2057 Erulaital\'eb}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 Praise of Eru}{\lang2057 , as the name of a N\'famen\'f3rean festival: UT:166, 436). In a more purely "religious" meaning, }{\i\lang2057 bless}{\lang2057 
 as opposed to merely }{\i\lang2057 praise}{\lang2057  or }{\i\lang2057 magnify}{\lang2057 , #}{\b\lang2057 aista}{\lang2057 - must henceforth be the first choice of writers.
\par \tab These texts do not provide much more information about the verb }{\i\lang2057 to be}{\lang2057  in Quenya (a topic writers really would like to know more about!), though it may be noted that the imperative }{\i\lang2057 be!}{\lang2057  seems to be }{
\b\lang2057 na}{\lang2057  (q.v. above). If }{\b\lang2057 i \'eba han \'eba}{\lang2057  does mean something like *}{\i\lang2057 who art in heaven (E\'e4)}{\lang2057 , or even *}{\i\lang2057 who art above E\'e4}{\lang2057 , this confirms that }{
\b\lang2057 \'eba}{\lang2057  rather than }{\b\lang2057 n\'e1}{\lang2057  is used for }{\i\lang2057 is}{\lang2057  with reference to a position (cf. }{\b\lang2057 i or ily\'eb mahalmar \'eba}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 who is above all thrones}{\lang2057 
 in Cirion's Oath). It is, however, interesting to see that nominal sentences with no explicit copula are apparently quite permissible and even usual: }{\b\lang2057 i H\'e9ru as elye}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 the Lord [is] with thee}{\lang2057 , }{
\b\lang2057 aistana elye}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 blessed [art] thou}{\lang2057 , }{\b\lang2057 aistana i y\'e1ve m\'f3nalyo}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 blessed [is] the fruit of thy womb}{\lang2057 .
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang2057 There are also some academic (rather than "practical") lessons here. The Lord's Prayer/Hail Mary translation demonstrates how Tolkien might "re-explain" certain forms that had been publish
ed, so that they would not conflict with linguistic revisions he had undertaken afterwards (a conflict that would have been unavoidable if he had maintained the explanation that he had originally intended). }{\b\lang2057 Aire}{\lang2057 
 is here repeatedly used for }{\i\lang2057 holy}{\lang2057 , and the first part of the compound }{\b\lang2057 airet\'e1ri}{\lang2057  in Nam\'e1ri\'eb is likewise translated }{\i\lang2057 holy }{\lang2057 
in LotR. In a much later source Tolkien however states that }{\b\lang2057 aire}{\lang2057  is "actually" a noun }{\i\lang2057 sanctity}{\lang2057 , the adjective }{\i\lang2057 holy}{\lang2057  being rather }{\b\lang2057 aira}{\lang2057 
 (PM:363-364). It can now be seen that this is not what he originally had in mind; when he first wrote }{\b\lang2057 airet\'e1ri}{\lang2057  he did intend }{\b\lang2057 aire}{\lang2057  to mean simply }{\i\lang2057 holy}{\lang2057 
. What triggered the subsequent re-explanations and rationalizations may have been a post-LotR revision of the diachronic phonology (or actually the }{\i\lang2057 undoing}{\lang2057  
of a revision that was "valid" during the final part of the period when LotR was written): When Tolkien once and for all decided that the change of primitive short *-}{\b\lang2057 i}{\lang2057  to Quenya -}{\b\lang2057 e}{\lang2057  occurred only at the }
{\i\lang2057 end}{\lang2057  of words and did not normally make it into other positions even by analogy, he had to face the fact that the already-published form }{\b\lang2057 airet\'e1ri}{\lang2057  should have been *}{\b\lang2057 airit\'e1ri}{\lang2057 
. In the related case }{\b\lang2057 carnem\'edrie}{\lang2057 , Tolkien did change it to }{\b\lang2057 carnim\'edrie}{\lang2057  in the revised version of LotR (1966), but }{\b\lang2057 airet\'e1ri}{\lang2057  persisted in this
 form and was later reinterpreted.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang2057 \tab If I were to emend these texts to "final-intention" Quenya, as well as it can be approximated now and to whatever extent it even makes sense to speak of Tolkien's "final intentions", I would alter 
}{\b\lang2057 \'facarer}{\lang2057  to *}{\b\lang2057 \'facarir}{\lang2057  (based on the late example }{\b\lang2057 karir}{\lang2057 
 in WJ:391, certainly postdating these translations); this again touches on the question of whether or not the change of final short *-}{\b\lang2057 i}{\lang2057  to -}{\b\lang2057 e}{\lang2057 
 spread to other positions by analogy. For the same reason I would perhaps also read *}{\b\lang2057 apsenit}{\lang2057  instead of }{\b\lang2057 apsenet}{\lang2057 . I would also change the strange plural }{\b\lang2057 n\'edsi}{\lang2057  }{\i\lang2057 
women}{\lang2057  to }{\b\lang2057 nissi}{\lang2057 , the form found elsewhere (including sources younger than this Hail Mary translation). }{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }{\lang2057 Whether we should furthermore read *}{\b\lang2057 At\'e1remma}{\lang2057  rather than }{\b\lang2057 \'c1taremma}{\lang2057 , or even }{\b\lang2057 Heru}{\lang2057  rather than }{\b\lang2057 H\'e9ru}{\lang2057 
, is difficult to say; such forms would at least be easier to reconcile with what has been published elsewhere. }{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 [Apparently Tolkien also turned -}{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 mm}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 
- as a pronominal element for exclusive "we, our" into -}{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 lm}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 -, a change that is reflected in the Second Edition of LotR: Incorporating this revision we would have to read *}{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1tarelma}
{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 , *}{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 massalma}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 , *}{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 \'facarelmar}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 , *}{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 elmen}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 , *}{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 firuvalme}{
\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  rather than }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 \'c1taremma}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 , }{\b\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0 massamma}{\cf6\lang2057\cgrid0  etc.] }{\lang2057 
But even so, Tolkien's translation of the Lord's Prayer and Hail Mary will stand as a remarkable sample of Quenya as Tolkien had come to see the High-Elven language about the time LotR was being published.}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par }}