{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff0\deflang1033\deflangfe1044{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f2\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 02070309020205020404}Courier New;}{\f3\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05050102010706020507}Symbol;}{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Times;}
{\f5\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Helvetica;}{\f6\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Courier;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Geneva;}
{\f8\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Tms Rmn;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Helv;}{\f10\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Serif;}
{\f11\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Sans Serif;}{\f12\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}New York;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}System;}
{\f14\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05000000000000000000}Wingdings;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq3{\*\panose 020b0604030504040204}Tahoma;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;
\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;
\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \f11\fs20\cgrid \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\info{\title Quettaparma Quenyanna}{\author Helge K\'e5re Fauskanger}
{\operator Helge K\'e5re Fauskanger}{\creatim\yr2002\mo12\dy25\hr19\min52}{\revtim\yr2002\mo12\dy25\hr19\min52}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages63}{\nofwords34200}{\nofchars194944}{\*\company  }{\nofcharsws239404}{\vern73}}
\margl1417\margr1417\margt1417\margb1417 \endnotes\aendnotes\aftnstart0\hyphhotz0\aftnnar\lytprtmet\hyphcaps0\viewkind4\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot \fet0\sectd \linex0\headery709\footery709\colsx709\endnhere\sectdefaultcl {\*\pnseclvl1
\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \f11\fs20\cgrid {\b\f1\fs36 Quettaparma Quenyanna}{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1\fs16  }{\f1\fs12  }{\f1\fs16 \'86}{\b\f1  }{\f1\fs16 = poetic or archaic word  (e.g.}{\f1\fs12  }{\f1\fs16 \'86}{\b\f1\fs16 \'e9l }{\f1\fs16 "star", }{\b\f1\fs16 elen }{\f1\fs16 
being the ordinary word) or a poetic or archaic meaning of an ordinary word (e.g. }{\b\f1\fs16 russ\'eb}{\f1\fs16  "corruscation, \'86swordblade"), * = unattested form, ** = wrong form, # = word that is only att
ested in a compound or in an inflected form (e.g. #}{\b\f1\fs16 apa}{\f1\fs16 , #}{\b\f1\fs16 Apan\'f3na}{\f1\fs16 
; see AFTER below), TLT = Tolkien's lifetime (by some called "Real Time", as opposed to:) MET = Middle-Earth Time (or rather Arda Time, since Quenya originated in the Blessed Realm), LotR = }{\i\f1\fs16 The Lord of the Rings}{\f1\fs16  (HarperCollins}{
\i\f1\fs16 Publishers}{\f1\fs16 , one-volume edition of 1991), Silm = }{\i\f1\fs16 The Silmarillion}{\f1\fs16  (HarperCollins}{\i\f1\fs16 Publishers}{\f1\fs16  1994), MC = }{\i\f1\fs16 The Monsters and the Critics and other Essays}{\f1\fs16 , MR = }{
\i\f1\fs16 Morgoth's Ring}{\f1\fs16 , LR = }{\i\f1\fs16 The Lost Road}{\f1\fs16 , Etym }{\b\f1\fs16 = }{\i\f1\fs16 The Etymologies }{\f1\fs16 (in LR:347-400), FS = }{\i\f1\fs16 F\'edriel's Song}{\f1\fs16  (in LR:72), RGEO = }{\i\f1\fs16 
The Road Goes Ever On}{\f1\fs16   (Second Edition), WJ = }{\i\f1\fs16 The War of the Jewels}{\f1\fs16 ,  PM = }{\i\f1\fs16 The Peoples of Middle-earth}{\f1\fs16 , Letters = }{\i\f1\fs16 The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien, }{\f1\fs16 LT1 = }{\i\f1\fs16 
The Book of Lost Tales 1}{\f1\fs16 ,}{\i\f1\fs16  }{\f1\fs16 LT2 = }{\i\f1\fs16 The Book of Lost Tales 2}{\f1\fs16 ,}{\i\f1\fs16  }{\f1\fs16 Nam = }{\i\f1\fs16 Nam\'e1ri\'eb }{\f1\fs16 (in LotR:398), Arct = }{\i\f1\fs16 "Arctic" sentence }{\f1\fs16  (in }
{\i\f1\fs16 The Father Christmas Letters}{\f1\fs16 ), GL = }{\i\f1\fs16 Gnomish Lexicon}{\f1\fs16  (in }{\i\f1\fs16 Parma Eldalamberon}{\f1\fs16  #11 - references are selective), QL = }{\i\f1\fs16 Qenya Lexicon}{\f1\fs16  (in }{\i\f1\fs16 
Parma Eldalamberon}{\f1\fs16  #12 - references are again selective), VT = }{\i\f1\fs16 Vinyar Tengwar}{\f1\fs16 
, vb = verb, adj = adjective, interj = interjection, pa.t. = past tense, fut = future tense, perf = perfect tense, freq = frequentative form, inf = infinitive, gen = genitive, pl = plural form, sg = singular form. The spelling used in this word
list is regularized (}{\b\f1\fs16 c}{\f1\fs16  for }{\b\f1\fs16 k }{\f1\fs16 except in a few names, }{\b\f1\fs16 x}{\f1\fs16  for }{\b\f1\fs16 ks}{\f1\fs16 
, long vowels marked with accents rather than macrons or circumflexes;  the diaeresis is used as in LotR).  When }{\b\f1\fs16 s}{\f1\fs16  in a word represents earlier \'de}{\i\f1\fs16  }{\f1\fs16 (}{\i\f1\fs16 th}{\f1\fs16 
 as in "thing") and it should be spelt with the letter }{\b\f1\fs16 s\'fal\'eb}{\f1\fs16  instead of }{\b\f1\fs16 silm\'eb}{\f1\fs16  in Tengwar writing (though Tolkien himself sometimes ignored or forgot this), this is indicated by (}{\b\f1\fs16 \'de}{
\f1\fs16 ) immediately following the word in question (e.g. }{\b\f1\fs16 sanda}{\f1\fs16 , }{\b\f1\fs16 sanya}{\f1\fs16 -; see ABIDE, ABIDING below).
\par   
\par }{\b\f1\fs24  <A>}{\f1\fs16 
\par }{\f1   A, AN }{\i\f1 (indefinite article) }{\f1 - }{\i\f1 no Quenya equivalent. }{\b\i\f1 Elen }{\i\f1 "star" may thus also be translated "a star" (LotR:94). The absence of the definite article }{\b\i\f1 i }{\i\f1 
"the" usually indicates that the noun is indefinite (though there are exceptions - see THE).}{\f1 
\par   ABANDON }{\b\f1 hehta}{\i\f1 - (pa.t. }{\b\i\f1 hehtan\'eb }{\i\f1 is given but seems perfectly regular) }{\f1 (put aside, leave out, exclude, forsake) }{\i\f1 -WJ:365}{\f1 
\par   ABHOR }{\b\f1 feuya-}{\f1 ;}{\b\f1  }{\f1 THE ABHORRED }{\b\f1 Sauron}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -PHEW, Silm:418}{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1   ABIDE }{\b\f1 mar}{\f1 - (be settled of fixed) }{\i\f1 (fut. }{\b\i\f1 #maruva }{\i\f1 is attested: }{\b\i\f1 maruvan }{\i\f1 "I will abide")}{\f1 ; ABIDE BY }{\b\f1 himya}{\f1 -}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (cleave to, stick to);}{\b\f1  }{\f1 ABIDING }{\b\f1 
sanda }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (firm, true); LAW-ABIDING }{\b\f1 sanya }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) (regular, normal) }{\i\f1 -UT:317/LotR:1003, KHIM, STAN }{\b\i\f1 
\par }{\f1   ABUNDANCE }{\b\f1 \'fav\'eb}{\f1 ;}{\b\f1  }{\f1 ABUNDANT }{\b\f1 \'fav\'eba }{\f1 (in a very great number), }{\b\f1 alya }{\f1 (rich, blessed, prosperous)}{\i\f1  -UB, GALA
\par   }{\f1 ABYSS }{\b\f1 undum\'eb }{\f1 -}{\i\f1 MC:222 cf. 215 }{\f1 
\par   ACCOUNT }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 quental\'eb }{\f1 (history), }{\b\f1 l\'famequenta }{\f1 (chronological account, history); HISTORICAL ACCOUNT }{\b\f1 quentasta}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
(any particular arrangement, by some author, of a series of reconds or evidences into a given historical account - not History as such, which is }{\b\i\f1 quental\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -KWET, LU, VT39:16}{\f1 
\par   ACROSS }{\b\f1 arta }{\f1 (athwart) }{\i\f1 (Note: }{\b\i\f1 arta }{\i\f1 also means "fort, fortress") -LT2:335}{\f1 
\par   ACT OF WILL }{\b\f1 nirm\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -VT39:30}{\f1 
\par   ACTOR }{\b\f1 tyaro }{\f1 (agent, doer) }{\i\f1 -KYAR}{\f1 
\par   ACTUAL }{\b\f1 anwa }{\f1 (real, true) }{\i\f1 -ANA}{\f1 
\par   ACUTE }{\b\f1 tereva }{\f1 (fine, piercing); ACUTE, ACUTENESS }{\b\f1 laic\'eb }{\f1 (keen, sharp, *piercing) }{\i\f1 (It may be that }{\b\i\f1 laic\'eb}{\i\f1  as an adjective "acute" is a misreading for }{\b\i\f1 laica}{\i\f1 . Cf. }{\b\i\f1 laica }{
\i\f1 in LT2:337. If so, }{\b\i\f1 laic\'eb}{\i\f1  = noun "acuteness" only.) -TER, LAIK   }{\f1 
\par   ADHERING }{\b\f1 himba }{\f1 (sticking) }{\i\f1 -KHIM
\par   }{\f1 ADMIRAL }{\b\f1 ciryatur }{\i\f1 (only attested as the personal name }{\b\i\f1 Ciryatur}{\i\f1  of an admiral, but the word means *"ship-ruler") -UT:239
\par }{\f1   ADULT }{\i\f1 (adj) }{\b\f1 v\'eba}{\f1  (manly, vigorous); ADULT MAN }{\b\f1 v\'ebaner}{\f1 ; ADULT MALE }{\b\f1 n\'e9r }{\f1 (pl }{\b\f1 neri}{\f1 ) (man) }{\i\f1 -WEG, DER
\par   }{\f1 AD\'dbNAKHOR }{\b\f1 Herun\'famen }{\i\f1 -UT:222, Silm:322
\par   }{\f1 AEGNOR }{\b\f1 Aican\'e1ro }{\i\f1 (so in Silm:435 and PM:345; MR:323 has }{\b\i\f1 Aican\'e1r}{\i\f1 ) }{\f1 (Sharp Flame, Fell Fire)}{\i\f1  }{\f1 
\par   AFFECTIONATE }{\b\f1 m\'e9la}{\f1  (loving) }{\i\f1 (VT39:10)}{\f1 
\par   AFTER #}{\b\f1 apa}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (only attested in compounds like }{\b\i\f1 Apan\'f3nar}{\i\f1 , see below)}{\f1 , #}{\b\f1 ep}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (used in compounds when the second part of the compound begins with a vowel, only attested in }{\b\i\f1 epess
\'eb }{\i\f1 "after-name" - see }{\f1 NICKNAME}{\i\f1 .) }{\f1 THE AFTER-BORN }{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 Apan\'f3nar }{\i\f1 (sg #}{\b\i\f1 Apan\'f3na}{\i\f1 
) (i.e., an Elvish name of Men, according to WJ:387 "a word of lore, not used in daily speech")                      
\par -Silm:122/WJ:387, UT:266}{\f1 
\par   AGAIN }{\b\f1 ata}{\f1 ; AGAIN }{\i\f1 (prefix) }{\b\f1 en-}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 (prefix) }{\b\f1 at-}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ata- }{\f1 (back-, re-) (}{\i\f1 AT[AT])}{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1   AGE }{\b\f1 randa }{\f1 (cycle) }{\i\f1 -RAD}{\f1 
\par   AGENT }{\b\f1 tyaro }{\f1 (actor, doer) }{\i\f1 -KAR}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1   }{\f1 AGILE }{\b\f1 tyelca }{\f1 (swift) }{\i\f1 -KYELEK}{\f1 
\par   AGO }{\b\f1 y\'e1 }{\i\f1 -YA}{\f1 
\par   AGONY }{\b\f1 qualm\'eb }{\f1 (death), }{\b\f1 unqual\'eb }{\f1 (death) }{\i\f1 -KWAL}{\f1 
\par   AH }{\i\f1 (interj.) }{\b\f1 ai }{\f1 (alas) }{\b\f1 Ai! lauri\'eb lantar lassi }{\f1 Ah! golden fall the leaves }{\i\f1 (Nam)}{\f1 
\par   AIR }{\b\f1 vista }{\f1 (= air as substance); }{\b\f1 lind\'eb }{\f1 (tune, song, singing); }{\b\f1 vilya }{\i\f1 older [MET]}{\f1  }{\b\f1 wilya }{\f1 (sky); }{\b\f1 vilma }{\f1 (lower air) }{\i\f1 (perhaps changed to }{\b\i\f1 vista}{\i\f1 , but }{
\b\i\f1 vilma }{\i\f1 was not struck out in Etym); }{\f1 PUFF OF AIR}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 hwesta}{\b\i\f1  }{\f1 (breeze, breath);}{\i\f1  }{\f1 UPPER AIRS AND CLOUDS }{\b\f1 fanyar\'eb }{\f1 (skies), AIRY }{\b\f1 vilin}{\i\f1  }{\f1 (breezy)}{\i\f1 
 -WIS, LIN, WIL/LT1:273, SWES/LotR:1157, MC:223, LT1:273
\par }{\f1   ALAS }{\i\f1 (interj.) }{\b\f1 ai }{\f1 (ah) }{\i\f1 (Etym also gives a word }{\b\i\f1 nai}{\i\f1 , but this clashes with }{\b\i\f1 nai }{\i\f1 "be it that" in Nam\'e1ri\'eb.)  -Nam/RGEO:66, NAY
\par }{\f1   ALIVE }{\b\f1 cuina}{\f1 ; BEING ALIVE }{\i\f1 (noun not adj)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 cuil\'eb }{\f1 (life) }{\i\f1 (LT1:257 gives }{\b\i\f1 coina}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 coir\'eba}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -KUY}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 ALL }{\b\f1 ilya }{\f1 (all of a particular group of things, the whole, each, every) }{\i\f1 (Note: }{\b\i\f1 ilya }{\i\f1 becomes }{\b\i\f1 ily\'eb }{\i\f1 before a plural noun: }{\b\i\f1 ily\'eb tier }{\i\f1 "all paths")}{\f1 ; ALLNESS, THE ALL 
}{\b\f1 il\'fav\'eb }{\f1 (the whole), ALL THAT IS  WANTED }{\b\f1 f\'e1r\'eb }{\f1 (plenitude, sufficiency) }{\i\f1 -VT39:20, IL, Nam cf. RGEO:67, Silm:433/WJ:402, PHAR}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 ALLOW }{\b\f1 lav- }{\f1 (yield, grant); NOT ALLOW TO CONTINUE }{\b\f1 nuhta- }{\f1 (stunt, prevent from coming to completion, stop short)}{\i\f1  -DAB, WJ:413}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1   }{\f1 ALONE }{\b\f1 er }{\f1 (one, alone, only, but, still), }{\b\f1 eress\'eb }{\f1 (singly, only, }{\i\f1 also as noun: }{\f1 solitude) }{\i\f1 -ERE, LT1:269}{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1   ALPHABET }{\b\f1 tengwanda }{\i\f1 -TEK}{\f1 
\par   ALSO }{\b\f1 yando}{\f1  -}{\i\f1 QL:104
\par   }{\f1 ALTOGETHER }{\b\f1 aqua }{\f1 (fully, completely, wholly) }{\i\f1 -WJ:392
\par  }{\f1 *AMANIAN }{\i\f1 (only translated "of Aman" by Tolkien)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 amanya}{\f1 . Cf. also }{\b\f1 \'damanyar}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 \'daamanyar}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Alamanyar }{\f1 "those not of Aman" }{\i\f1 (the Elves who started on the march from Cuivi\'e9
nen but did not reach Aman; contrast the }{\b\i\f1 Avamanyar}{\i\f1 , another name of the Avari.)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -WJ:411, 373, 370, MR:163
\par   }{\f1 AMLOTH *}{\b\f1 Ambalots\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Tolkien asterisked the word because it was not attested, only a possible Quenya form of }{\b\i\f1 Amloth}{\i\f1 . See "UPRISING-FLOWER".) -WJ:318 
\par   }{\f1 AMRAS }{\b\f1 Telufinw\'eb }{\i\f1 (meaning "Last Finw\'eb", not the equivalent in sense to his Sindarin name. The short form of his name was }{\b\i\f1 Telvo }{\i\f1 *"Last One". His mother-name [q.v.] was }{\b\i\f1 Ambarussa}{\i\f1 
, but this name was not used in narrative.) -PM:353
\par   }{\f1 AMROD }{\b\f1 Pityafinw\'eb }{\i\f1 (meaning "Little Finw\'eb", not the equivalent in sense to his Sindarin name. The short form of his name was }{\b\i\f1 Pityo }{\i\f1 *"Little One". His mother-name [q.v.] was }{\b\i\f1 Ambarto}{\i\f1 , or }{
\b\i\f1 Umbarto}{\i\f1 , but these names were not used in narrative.) -PM:353
\par   }{\f1 AN }{\i\f1 see A}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 ANCIENT }{\b\f1 y\'e1ra}{\f1  (belonging to or descending from former times) }{\i\f1 -YA}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 AND }{\b\f1 ar }{\f1 (}{\i\f1 possibly}{\f1  }{\b\i\f1 a }{\i\f1 before }{\b\i\f1 f }{\i\f1 [and }{\b\i\f1 v}{\i\f1 ?]: }{\b\i\f1 eldain a f\'edrimoin }{\i\f1 "for elves and men" [FS], cf. }{\b\i\f1 a valmarion }{\i\f1 
"and of those of Valmar" [from "Antatye Voronwi"  by  C. Gilson, Vinyar Tengwar #31 p. 10]) (In Sauron Defeated  p. ii, }{\b\i\f1 o }{\i\f1 is translated  "and", but LotR, Silm and Etym all agree that the Quenya word for "and" is }{\b\i\f1 ar}{\i\f1 .) }{
\f1 AND YET }{\b\f1 a-nanta/ananta }{\f1 (but yet) }{\i\f1 -AR/Nam/FS, NDAN}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 ANGBAND }{\b\f1 Angamando }{\f1 (Iron-gaol) }{\i\f1 (so in MR:350 and Silm:428; Etym has }{\b\i\f1 Angamanda}{\i\f1 )}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -MR:350, Silm:428, MBAD}{\f1 
\par   ANGELIC POWER }{\b\f1 Vala}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 Valar }{\i\f1 or }{\b\i\f1 Vali}{\i\f1 , gen. pl. }{\b\i\f1 Valion }{\i\f1 is attested in F\'edriel's Song)}{\f1 ; ANGELIC SPIRIT }{\b\f1 Ainu}{\f1 , f. }{\b\f1 Aini }{\f1 (holy one, god) }{
\i\f1 -LotR:1157/BAL/FS, AYAN, LT1:248
\par   }{\f1 ANGELN }{\i\f1 (island in the Danish peninsula) }{\b\f1 Eriollo }{\i\f1 -LT1:252
\par }{\f1   ANGROD }{\b\f1 Angar\'e1to }{\i\f1 -Silm:428}{\f1 
\par   ANIMAL #}{\b\f1 kelva}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 (only pl. }{\b\i\f1 kelvar }{\i\f1 is attested}{\b\f1 , }{\i\f1 translated "animals, living things that move"}{\f1  }{\i\f1 in Silm appendix and WJ:341)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 laman }{\f1 (pl. }{\b\f1 lamni }{\f1 or }{
\b\f1 lamani}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 ("usually only applied to four-footed beasts, and never to reptiles and birds")}{\f1 ; MALE ANIMAL }{\b\f1 hanu }{\f1 (male) }{\i\f1 -Silm:52/53,/405:3AN, WJ:416
\par   }{\f1 ANYBODY }{\i\f1 - if anybody: }{\b\f1 aiquen }{\f1 (whoever) }{\i\f1 -WJ:372
\par   }{\f1 APRIL }{\b\f1 V\'edress\'eb }{\i\f1 -LotR:1144/1146}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 AR-AD\'dbNAKHOR }{\b\f1 Tar-Herun\'famen }{\i\f1 -UT:222, Silm:322
\par   }{\f1 AR-BELZAGAR }{\b\f1 Tar-Calmacil }{\i\f1 -UT:222}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 AR-GIMILZ\'d4R }{\b\f1 Tar-Telemnar }{\i\f1 -UT:223}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 AR-INZILAD\'dbN }{\b\f1 Tar-Palantir}{\i\f1  -UT:223, Silm:324}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 AR-PHARAZ\'d4N }{\b\f1 Tar-Calion }{\f1 -}{\i\f1 UT:224, Silm:324}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 AR-SAKALTH\'d4R }{\b\f1 Tar-Falassion }{\f1 -}{\i\f1 UT:223}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 AR-ZIMRAPHEL }{\b\f1 Tar-M\'edriel }{\f1 -}{\i\f1 UT:224, Silm:324}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 AR-ZIMRATH\'d4N }{\b\f1 Tar-Hostamir }{\f1 -}{\i\f1 UT:222
\par   }{\f1 ARCTURUS }{\i\f1 (a star) }{\b\f1 Morwinyon }{\i\f1 (said to mean "the glint at dusk" or "glint in the dark")}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -LT1:260
\par   }{\f1 ARE }{\i\f1 see }{\f1 BE
\par   ARGON }{\b\f1 Arac\'e1no}{\i\f1  -PM:345
\par }{\f1   ARM }{\b\f1 ranco }{\f1 (pl }{\b\f1 ranqui}{\f1 )}{\i\f1  (LT2:335 gives }{\b\i\f1 r\'e1 }{\i\f1 [there spelt }{\b\i\f1 r\'e2}{\i\f1 ], but this word is certainly obsolete: In Etym, }{\b\i\f1 r\'e1 }{\i\f1 is glossed "lion".) -RAK
\par   }{\f1 ARMY }{\b\f1 hoss\'eb }{\f1 (band, troop) -}{\i\f1 LT2:340
\par   }{\f1 ARNOR }{\b\f1 Arnanor}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Arnan\'f3r\'eb }{\f1 ("royal land") }{\i\f1 -Letters:428}{\f1 
\par   ARROW }{\b\f1 pilin }{\f1 (pl }{\b\f1 pilindi}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 -P\'cdLIM
\par   }{\f1 ART }{\b\f1 Carm\'eb }{\f1 (making, production) }{\i\f1 -UT:396
\par   }{\f1 ARTIFICIAL CAVE }{\b\f1 hr\'f3ta}{\f1  (dwelling underground, rockhewn hall) }{\i\f1 -PM:365
\par   }{\f1 AS }{\i\f1 (prep) }{\b\f1 ve }{\f1 (like) }{\i\f1 -Nam/RGEO:66, 67
\par   }{\f1 ASCENT }{\b\f1 rosta}{\f1 , ASCENSION }{\b\f1 orosta }{\i\f1 -LT1:267, 256
\par   }{\f1 ASGARD }{\b\f1 Valinor}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Valin\'f3r\'eb }{\i\f1 (Tolkien actually uses this gloss of }{\b\i\f1 Valinor}{\i\f1 , as Asgard is the City of the Gods in Norse mythology) -LT1:272
\par   }{\f1 ASIDE - }{\i\f1 stand aside!}{\f1  }{\b\f1 heca! }{\f1 - also with pronominal affixes: sg }{\b\f1 hecat}{\f1 , pl }{\b\f1 hecal }{\f1 "you stay aside!" (be gone!) LEAVING ASIDE }{\b\f1 hequa }{\f1 (not counting, excluding, except) }{\i\f1 
-WJ:364, 365
\par  *}{\f1 ASK #}{\b\f1 maquet}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (only pa.t. }{\b\i\f1 maquent\'eb }{\i\f1 is attested. The word is not translated, but undoubtedly means "asked": }{\b\i\f1 'Mana i\'b7coimas in\'b7Eldaron?' maquent\'eb Elendil}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
[PM:403]. The question itself is translated "What is the }{\f1 coimas }{\i\f1 of the Eldar?", so the rest must be "Elendil asked". Furthermore, }{\b\i\f1 maquent\'eb }{\i\f1 is transparently }{\b\i\f1 quent\'eb }{\i\f1 
"said" with the interrogative element }{\b\i\f1 ma }{\i\f1 [PM:357] prefixed.)}{\f1  ASK FOR - }{\i\f1 see}{\f1  DEMAND.
\par   ASLEEP }{\b\f1 lorna }{\i\f1 -LOS}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 ASSEMBLE }{\b\f1 hosta- }{\f1 (gather, collect)}{\i\f1  -MC:223}{\f1 
\par   ASSOCIATE }{\b\f1 otorno }{\f1 (sworn brother) }{\b\f1 osell\'eb }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (sworn sister) }{\i\f1 -TOR, THEL
\par   }{\f1 ASTRONOMER }{\b\f1 meneldil }{\i\f1 -Letters:386
\par   }{\f1 ATHWART }{\b\f1 arta }{\f1 (across) }{\i\f1 (Note: }{\b\i\f1 arta }{\i\f1 also means "fort, fortress")}{\f1 ; GO ATHWART }{\b\f1 tara- }{\f1 (cross) }{\i\f1 -LT2:335, 347    
\par   }{\f1 AUGER }{\b\f1 teret }{\f1 (gimlet) }{\i\f1 -LT1:255
\par   }{\f1 AUGUST }{\b\f1 Urim\'eb }{\i\f1 (so in LotR; UT has }{\b\i\f1 \'darim\'eb}{\i\f1 ) -LotR:1144, UT:302/470}{\f1 
\par   AUTHORITY }{\b\f1 M\'e1han }{\i\f1 (pl }{\b\i\f1 M\'e1hani }{\i\f1 is given, but seems perfectly regular). Tolkien once stated that }{\b\i\f1 Valar }{\i\f1 should strictly be translated "the Authorities" (MR:350), but }{\b\i\f1 Vala}{\i\f1  o
bviously cannot be used to translate "authority" in general; it was used only of the Valar themselves (WJ:404). Cf. also adj. }{\b\i\f1 valya }{\i\f1 "having (divine) authority or power". }{\b\i\f1 M\'e1hani }{\i\f1 
was adopted from Valarin and originally probably referred to the Valar themselves. We are not told whether }{\b\i\f1 M\'e1han}{\i\f1  could or should be applied to a non-divine authority (at least it should not be capitalized if so used). Note: }{\b\i\f1 
M\'e1han }{\i\f1 means *"Supreme One" rather than "authority" as an abstract. -MR:350, BAL, WJ:399/402
\par }{\f1   AUTUMN }{\b\f1 y\'e1vi\'eb }{\f1 (harvest - }{\i\f1 in the Calendar of Imladris, }{\b\i\f1 y\'e1vi\'eb }{\i\f1 was a precisely defined period of 54 days, but the word was also used without any exact definition), }{\b\f1 lasselanta}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
("leaf-fall", used of the beginning of winter or as a synonym of }{\b\i\f1 quell\'eb}{\i\f1 ; see FADING. Also spelt }{\b\i\f1 lasse-lanta }{\i\f1 with a hyphen)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 narquelion }{\i\f1 ("fire-fading"}{\f1  - }{\i\f1 this word from}{\f1  }{
\i\f1 F\'edriel's Song and Etym seems to correspond to}{\f1  }{\b\i\f1 narqueli\'eb }{\i\f1 in LotR, but the latter is the name of the month corresponding to our October.) LT1:273 has }{\b\i\f1 y\'e1van}{\i\f1  "autumn, harvest", but this word may 
be obsoleted by }{\b\i\f1 y\'e1vi\'eb}{\i\f1 . -LotR:1142, 1144, 1145/Silm:439/LT1:254, DAT, FS, NAR/KWAL, Letters:382
\par   }{\f1 AVENUE OF TREES }{\b\f1 ald\'ebon }{\i\f1 -LT1:249}{\f1 
\par   AWAKE }{\b\f1 coiva- }{\i\f1 (so in LT1:257; read }{\b\i\f1 *cuiva}{\i\f1 -}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 in Tolkien's later Quenya? Cf. the following:) }{\f1 AWAKENING (}{\i\f1 noun) }{\b\f1 cuivi\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (obsoleting }{\b\i\f1 coivi\'eb }{\i\f1 
in LT1:257)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 cuiv\'eb}{\f1 ; AWAKENING }{\i\f1 (adj) }{\b\f1 cuiv\'eba }{\i\f1 -KUY/Silm:429}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 AWAY }{\b\f1 oa}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 oar }{\i\f1 (viewed from the point of view of the thing, person, or place left).}{\f1  }{\b\f1 Oar}{\f1  is used of }{\i\f1 movement}{\f1  only, as in "I went away". See also GO AWAY.}{\i\f1  -WJ:366 cf. 361, VT39:6}
{\f1 . 
\par   AWNING }{\b\f1 teltass\'eb}{\i\f1  -GL:70}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 AXE }{\b\f1 pelecco }{\i\f1 -LT2:346}{\b\f1   
\par 
\par }{\b\i\f1\fs24  }{\b\f1\fs24  <B>}{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1   BABE }{\b\f1 laps\'eb }{\i\f1 -LAP
\par   }{\f1 BACK - }{\i\f1 LT2:338 mentions a Gnomish word }{\b\i\f1 alm}{\i\f1 , said to mean "the broad of the back from shoulder to shoulder, back, shoulders". It is stated that the "Qenya" cognate of this Gnomish word occurs in the name }{\b\i\f1 
Aikaldamor}{\i\f1  - i.e., #}{\b\i\f1 aldamo }{\i\f1 or }{\b\i\f1 #aldamor}{\i\f1 ? But this is hardly a valid word in LotR-style Quenya. }{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BACK- }{\i\f1 (prefix)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 at-, ata- }{\f1 (re-, again-); THOSE WHO GO BACK }{\b\f1 Nandor }{\i\f1 (Elves that left the March from Cuivi\'e9nen) -AT(AT), WJ:384}{\f1 
\par   BACKWARDS }{\b\f1 nan- }{\i\f1 (prefix?) -NDAN
\par }{\f1   BAD - Gnomish }{\i\f1 f\'eag}{\f1  is so glossed in GL:34, and this is equated with Q }{\b\f1 faica}{\f1 , glossed "contemptible, mean" under }{\i\f1 SPAY}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BAKE }{\b\f1 masta- }{\i\f1 -MBAS}{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1   BALE OUT }{\b\f1 calpa- }{\f1 (draw water, scoop out)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -KALPA}{\f1 
\par   BALL }{\b\f1 coron}{\f1  (stem #}{\b\f1 corn}{\f1 -, as in dat.sg. }{\b\f1 cornen}{\f1 ) (globe) }{\i\f1 -KOR}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BALROG }{\b\f1 Valarauko }{\f1 (pl. }{\b\f1 Valaraukar}{\f1 )}{\i\f1  (so in the Silmarillion - in Etym the Quenya form of Sindarin }{\f1 balrog}{\i\f1  is }{\b\i\f1 malarauco}{\i\f1 , while LT1:250 gives }{\b\i\f1 Malcarauc\'eb}{\i\f1 
) -Silm:35/425/439, RUK
\par   }{\f1 BAND }{\b\f1 noss\'eb }{\f1 (army, troop) }{\i\f1 -LT2:340}{\b\i\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BANK }{\i\f1 (esp. of river)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 r\'e1va }{\i\f1 -RAMB\'c1
\par   }{\f1 BARK - }{\i\f1 Tolkien originally thought that }{\b\i\f1 parma }{\i\f1 "book" really meant "skin, bark; parchment", with "book, writings" as the secondary meaning. But in Etym }{\b\i\f1 parma }{\i\f1 
is derived from a stem meaning "compose, put together", obsoleting the old etymology. -LT2:346, contrast PAR}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BASE }{\b\f1 sundo }{\f1 (root, root-word) }{\i\f1 (pl. #}{\b\i\f1 sundar}{\i\f1 , isolated from }{\b\i\f1 Tarmasundar }{\i\f1 in UT:166)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 talan }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 talam-}{\f1 ) (floor, ground), }{\b\f1 talma }{\f1 (foundation, root);}{
\i\f1  }{\f1 BASE-STRUCTURE }{\b\f1 sundocarm\'eb}{\i\f1  -SUD, WJ:319, TALAM, TAL, LT:343}{\f1 
\par   BATTER }{\b\f1 palpa- }{\f1 (beat)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -PALAP}{\f1 
\par   BAY }{\i\f1 (small and landlocked)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 h\'f3pa }{\f1 (haven, harbour)}{\i\f1  -KHOP}{\f1 
\par   BE }{\i\f1 The only forms of the verb "to be" in the published corpus are }{\b\i\f1 n\'e1 }{\i\f1 "is" , }{\b\i\f1 nar }{\i\f1 "are", and  }{\b\i\f1 nai }{\i\f1 "be it that" (mistranslated "maybe" in LotR). The word }{\b\i\f1 \'eba }{\i\f1 
is variously translated "is", "exists", "it is", "let it be". F\'edriel's Song contains a word }{\b\i\f1 ye }{\i\f1 "is", but }{\b\i\f1 ye}{\i\f1  may be obsolete in LotR-style Quenya. For "was", some writers have used }{\b\i\f1 n\'e9}{\i\f1 
, pl. ("were") }{\b\i\f1 ner}{\i\f1 . Cf. also }{\b\i\f1 uin }{\i\f1 and }{\b\i\f1 umin}{\i\f1  "I do not, am not" (1st pers. aorist), pa.t. }{\b\i\f1 \'fam\'eb}{\i\f1 . -Nam/RGEO:67, An Introduction to Elvish:5, Silm:21/391, FS, UGU/UMU
\par   }{\f1 BE GONE! }{\b\f1 heca! }{\f1 - also with pronominal affixes: sg }{\b\f1 hecat}{\f1 , pl }{\b\f1 hecal }{\f1 "you be gone!" (stand aside!) }{\i\f1 -WJ:364
\par   }{\f1 BEACH }{\b\f1 falas }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 falass-}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 falass\'eb }{\f1 (shore, line of surf), }{\b\f1 falas}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 hresta}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 (ablative }{\b\i\f1 hrestallo }{\i\f1 is attested)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -LT1:253, Silm:431, PHAL/LT2
:339, MC:221/222/223
\par   }{\f1 BEAR }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 #col}{\f1 -}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (verb stem isolated from #}{\b\i\f1 colindo}{\i\f1  "bearer". Cf. }{\b\i\f1 mel}{\i\f1 - "to love", }{\b\i\f1 melindo }{\i\f1 "lover". }{\b\i\f1 #Col- }{\i\f1 
can also be translated *"wear" [of clothes], cf. the past participle }{\b\i\f1 colla }{\i\f1 "borne, worn".) }{\f1 BEAR FRUIT }{\b\f1 yavin }{\i\f1 (which must mean *"I bear fruit", stem #}{\b\i\f1 yav-}{\i\f1 
. Tolkien often employs the 1st person aorist when mentioning a verb in his wordlists.) -LotR:989, cf. Letters:308 and MEL, MR:385, LT1:273}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BEAR }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 morco }{\i\f1 -MOR\'d3K}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BEARD }{\b\f1 fanga}{\i\f1  (obsoleting }{\b\i\f1 vanga }{\i\f1 in GL:21; GL:34 has }{\b\i\f1 fang\'eb}{\i\f1  "long beard", while GL:63 gives }{\b\i\f1 poa}{\i\f1 . Use }{\b\i\f1 fanga}{\i\f1 .) -SP\'c1NAG
\par   }{\f1 BEARER #}{\b\f1 colindo }{\i\f1 (only attested in the pl compound }{\b\i\f1 cormacolindor }{\i\f1 "Ring-bearers") 
\par -LotR:989, cf. Letters:308}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BEAT }{\b\f1 palpa- }{\f1 (batter) }{\i\f1 -PALAP
\par   }{\f1 BEAUTIFUL }{\b\f1 vanya }{\i\f1 (Note: a homophone means "disappear")}{\f1 ,}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 linda}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 calwa}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 vanima }{\i\f1 (nominal pl }{\b\i\f1 vanimar }{\i\f1 "beautiful ones" and partitive plural genitive }{\b\i\f1 
vanim\'e1lion }{\i\f1 are attested) }{\f1 (fair, proper, right). }{\i\f1 According to MR:49, }{\b\i\f1 Maiar }{\i\f1 means "the Beautiful", but in Quenya this is the name of an order of spirits and cannot be used as a general adjective. }{\f1 BEAUTY }{
\b\f1 vaness\'eb}{\f1 , WITHOUT BEAUTY }{\b\f1 \'favan\'eb}{\f1 , adj. }{\b\f1 \'favan\'eba}{\f1  -}{\i\f1 BAN, SLIN, LT1:254, LotR:1017 cf. Letters:308, LT1:272, MR:49, VT39:14
\par }{\b\f1   }{\f1 BED }{\b\f1 caima}{\f1 ; BEDCHAMBER }{\b\f1 caimasan }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (pl. }{\b\f1 caimasambi}{\f1 ); BEDRIDDEN }{\b\f1 caimass\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 caimass\'eba }{\f1 (sick); LYING IN BED }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 
caila }{\f1 (sickness) }{\i\f1 -KAY, STAB}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 BEE}{\b\f1  nier}{\f1  (honey-bee), }{\b\f1 nion }{\i\f1 -GL:60}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BEECH }{\b\f1 feren}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 fern\'eb }{\i\f1 (pl.}{\f1  }{\b\f1 ferni }{\i\f1 in both cases) (LT2:343 gives }{\b\i\f1 neldor }{\i\f1 "beech", but this early word may be obsolete in LotR-style Quenya.) -PHER
\par   }{\f1 BEECHEN }{\b\f1 ferinya}{\f1  -}{\i\f1 PH\'c9REN}{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1   BEGET }{\b\f1 nosta}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (also glossed "give birth")}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 onta- }{\i\f1 (pa.t. }{\b\i\f1 \'f3n\'eb }{\i\f1 or }{\b\i\f1 ontan\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 ; BEGETTER #}{\b\f1 nostar }{\i\f1 (see note)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ontaro }{\i\f1 (m.)}{
\f1 , }{\b\f1 ontar\'eb }{\i\f1 (f.)}{\f1  (parent). }{\i\f1 (In LotR, the form }{\b\i\f1 nostari }{\i\f1 "begetters, parents" occurs; sg #}{\b\i\f1 nostar}{\i\f1 . }{\b\i\f1 Nostari }{\i\f1 was changed from }{\b\i\f1 ontari}{\i\f1 
 in Tolkien's first draft [see SD:73], so he may have scrapped }{\b\i\f1 ontaro}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 ontar\'eb }{\i\f1 in favour of #}{\b\i\f1 nostar}{\i\f1  [or m. *}{\b\i\f1 nostaro}{\i\f1 , f. }{\b\i\f1 *nostar\'eb}{\i\f1 
???] Did he also reject the verb }{\b\i\f1 onta- }{\i\f1 in favour of }{\b\i\f1 nosta}{\i\f1 -?) -SD:73, ONO, LotR:1017 cf. Letters:308
\par   }{\f1 BEGINNING *}{\b\f1 yess\'eb }{\i\f1 (Corrected from the actual reading }{\b\i\f1 esse}{\i\f1 , derived from a stem that was marked with a query by Tolkien because }{\b\i\f1 esse }{\i\f1 
also = name. Evidence from LotR indicates that he decided to change the stem in question from }{\b\i\f1 ESE }{\i\f1 to}{\b\i\f1  *YESE}{\i\f1 , thus eliminating this homophony: In LotR:1142 we find }{\b\i\f1 yestar\'eb}{\i\f1 
, apparently meaning *"first-day" - it is not translated, but it was the name of the first day of the year and }{\b\i\f1 r\'e9 }{\i\f1 means "day". In Etym [stem }{\b\i\f1 ESE}{\i\f1 ]}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 the word for "first" was }{\b\i\f1 esta}{\i\f1 
. So for }{\b\i\f1 esta }{\i\f1 "first", }{\b\i\f1 esse }{\i\f1 "beginning" and }{\b\i\f1 essea }{\i\f1 "?primary" [gloss illegible], we should evidently read *}{\b\i\f1 yesta}{\i\f1 , *}{\b\i\f1 yess\'eb}{\i\f1  and }{\b\i\f1 yess\'eba}{\i\f1 
.) -ESE/ESET
\par   }{\f1 BEGOTTEN - }{\i\f1 see FIRST-BEGOTTEN.
\par   }{\f1 BEHOLD }{\b\f1 cen- }{\f1 (see) }{\i\f1 (future tense }{\b\i\f1 cenuva }{\i\f1 is attested}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 -MC:222}{\f1 
\par   BEING }{\b\f1 \'ebala }{\f1 (spirit).}{\i\f1 Pl. }{\b\i\f1 \'ebalar }{\i\f1 is attested. }{\b\i\f1 E\'e4lar }{\i\f1 are spirits whose natural state it is to exist without a physical body, e.g. Balrogs. -MR:165}{\f1 
\par   BEING ALIVE }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 cuil\'eb }{\i\f1 -KUY
\par   }{\f1 BELEGOST }{\b\f1 T\'farosto }{\f1 (Mickleburg) }{\i\f1 -WJ:389
\par   }{\f1 BELERIAND }{\b\f1 Hecelmar}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Heceldamar }{\i\f1 (lit. *"home of the Eglath", q.v.) This is said to be the name for Beleriand used "in the language of the loremasters of Aman". The cognate of Sindarin "Beleriand" is #}{\b\i\f1 
Valariand\'eb}{\i\f1 ; only the form }{\b\i\f1 Valarianden }{\i\f1 is attested (a genitive formation from an earlier "Qenya" variant; in LotR-style Quenya it would be a dative). The latter may be the name used in Exilic Quenya. Beleriand was also called }
{\b\i\f1 Ingolond\'eb}{\i\f1  "Land of the Gnomes [Noldor]". -WJ:365, LR:202, \'d1GOLOD}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BELL }{\b\f1 nyell\'eb }{\i\f1 -NYEL
\par   }{\f1 BELLIED #}{\b\f1 cumba }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 sauricumba }{\i\f1 "foulbellied"). This adjective may point to }{\b\i\f1 *cumbo }{\i\f1 or something similar as the likely word for "belly". -SD:68, 72}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BELOVED }{\b\f1 melda }{\f1 (dear). }{\i\f1 Cf. }{\b\i\f1 nessamelda}{\i\f1 , *"beloved of Nessa", a flagrant evergreen tree brought to N\'famenor by the Eldar.}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -MEL, UT:456
\par   }{\f1 BELZAGAR }{\b\f1 Calmacil }{\i\f1 -UT:222
\par   }{\f1 BEND #}{\b\f1 c\'fana- }{\i\f1 (derived from the adj. }{\b\i\f1 c\'fana }{\i\f1 "bent"; see MC:223. In }{\b\i\f1 menel ac\'fana }{\i\f1 "the heavens bending" the word is used intransitively.) -MC:222/223 cf. 215}{\f1    
\par   BENEATH }{\b\f1 undu }{\f1 (down, under) }{\i\f1 -UNU}{\f1 
\par   BENT }{\b\f1 c\'fana }{\f1 (curved; }{\b\i\f1 c\'fana }{\i\f1 is also used as a verbal stem, see BEND}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 raica }{\f1 (crooked, wrong), }{\b\f1 cauca }{\f1 (crooked, humped), }{\b\f1 sara }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\f1 
(stiff dry grass) }{\i\f1 -MC:223, RAYAK, LT1:257, STAR
\par }{\f1   BERRY }{\b\f1 piucca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -GL:64 }{\f1 (glossed "blackberry" in LT2:347)
\par   BESIDE }{\b\f1 ara}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 also }{\b\f1 ar- }{\i\f1 as prefix. -AR
\par   }{\f1 BETWEEN }{\b\f1 imb\'eb }{\i\f1 -Nam/RGEO:67
\par   }{\f1 BEYOND }{\b\f1 pella }{\i\f1 (a postposition in Quenya: }{\b\i\f1 And\'fan\'eb pella }{\i\f1 "beyond the West", }{\b\i\f1 elenillor pella }{\i\f1 "from beyond the stars") -Nam, MC:222
\par }{\f1   BIER }{\b\f1 tulma }{\i\f1 -LT1:270}{\f1 
\par   BIND (see }{\i\f1 TIE}{\f1 ); in more abstract sense: }{\b\f1 avalerya}{\f1 - (make fast, restrain, deprive of liberty) }{\i\f1 -VT41:5, 6}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 BIG DIPPER }{\i\f1 see }{\f1 SICKLE OF THE VALAR.}{\i\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BIPED #}{\b\f1 attalya }{\i\f1 (Only pl }{\b\i\f1 Attalyar }{\i\f1 is attested.}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 The word was used of the Petty-dwarves, q.v.) -WJ:389
\par   }{\f1 BIRD }{\b\f1 aiw\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 filit }{\f1 (pl }{\b\f1 filici}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (Note: both }{\b\i\f1 aiw\'eb }{\i\f1 and }{\b\i\f1 filit }{\i\f1 are stated to mean "small bird", not "bird" in general)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ambal\'eb}{\f1 , }{
\b\f1 ammal\'eb }{\i\f1 (= yellow bird)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 lindo }{\i\f1 (= "singer", singing bird). LT1:273 also has }{\b\i\f1 wilin}{\i\f1 ; this may or may not be a valid word in LotR-style Quenya.}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 -AIW\'ca, PHILIK, SMAL, LIN}{\f1    

\par   BIRTH, BIRTHDAY }{\b\f1 nosta}{\f1 ; GIVE BIRTH}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 nosta- }{\i\f1 (but in later sources, }{\b\i\f1 nosta- }{\i\f1 is glossed "beget", q.v.) -LT1:272}{\f1 
\par   BITE }{\i\f1 (vb)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 nac- }{\f1 BITE }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 nahta}{\i\f1  -NAK}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BITTER }{\b\f1 s\'e1ra }{\i\f1 -SAG}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BLACK  }{\b\f1 mor\'eb }{\i\f1 (in compounds }{\b\i\f1 mori-}{\i\f1 , e.g. }{\b\i\f1 Moriquendi}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 morna}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 morqua}{\f1 ;}{\i\f1  }{\f1 BLACKNESS }{\b\f1 m\'f3r\'eb }{\f1 (night); BLACKHANDED }{\b\f1 morimait\'eb}{
\f1 , BLACKBERRY }{\b\f1 piucca}{\f1  (only "berry" in GL:64); BLACK FOE }{\b\f1 Moringotto }{\i\f1 (the oldest [MET] form was }{\b\i\f1 Mori\'f1gotho}{\i\f1 ) }{\f1 (Morgoth) }{\i\f1 -MOR, LT1:260, LotR:1015/SD:68, 72, LT2:347, MR:194}{\f1 
\par   BLADE }{\b\f1 hyanda }{\f1 (share), }{\i\f1 (sword blade:)}{\f1  \'86}{\b\f1 russ\'eb }{\f1 (corruscation) }{\i\f1 -LT2:342, RUS}{\f1 
\par   BLAZE }{\b\f1 urya- }{\i\f1 (The stem this word is derived from was struck out in Etym. However, several words that must be derived from the same stem occur in LotR, indicating that Tolkien restored it.) }{\f1 BLAZING HOT }{\b\f1 \'farin }{\i\f1 (}{
\b\i\f1 \'darin }{\i\f1 also being a name of the Sun)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -UR, LT1:271
\par }{\f1   BLEND }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 ostim\'eb}{\f1  (pl. }{\b\f1 ostimi}{\f1 
 is attested). This term refers to a kind of "strengthened" elements within a stem, where a single sound has been expanded into two different elements while maintaining a unitary effect and significance; souch as }{\i\f1 s}{\f1 - being turned ito }{\i\f1 
st}{\f1 -, or }{\i\f1 m }{\f1 being strengthened to }{\i\f1 mb}{\f1 . However, this may be the meaning of the word in linguistic terminology only; it may be permissible to use it for "blend" in more general senses as well. }{\i\f1 -VT39:9}{\f1 
\par   BLESS }{\b\f1 laita- }{\f1 (praise) }{\i\f1 (Imperative }{\b\i\f1 a laita }{\i\f1 and fut #}{\b\i\f1 laituva }{\i\f1 are attested, the latter with pronominal endings: }{\b\i\f1 laituvalmet}{\i\f1 , "we shall praise [or bless] them".) }{\f1 BLESSED }{
\b\f1 alya}{\f1 ,}{\b\f1  alm\'e1r\'eba }{\f1 (prosperous, rich, abundant), }{\b\f1 herenya }{\f1 (wealthy, fortunate, rich), }{\b\f1 aman }{\i\f1 ("blessed, free from evil" - }{\b\i\f1 Aman }{\i\f1 
was "chiefly used as the name of the land where the Valar dwelt." [WJ:399]).}{\f1  BLESSED BEING }{\b\f1 Manw\'eb }{\i\f1 (the King of the Valar)}{\f1 ; BLESSEDNESS }{\b\f1 vald- }{\i\f1 (so in LT1:272; nom. sg. must be either *}{\b\i\f1 val }{\i\f1 or *}
{\b\i\f1 vald\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1  (happiness), "BLESSINGS", BLESSEDNESS, BLISS }{\b\f1 almi\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 almar\'eb}{\f1 ; FINAL BLISS }{\b\f1 manar, mand\'eb }{\f1 (doom, final end, fate, fortune) }{\i\f1 
-LotR:989 cf Letters:308; GAL, KHER, Letters:283, LT1:272, MAN/MANAD
\par }{\f1   BLIGHT }{\b\f1 yaru}{\f1  (gloom) }{\i\f1 -GL:37}{\f1 
\par   BLINK }{\b\f1 tihta- }{\f1 (peer) }{\i\f1 -MC:223}{\f1 
\par   BLOCK }{\b\f1 t\'e1p\'eb }{\i\f1 (3 pers sg aorist), pa.t.}{\f1  }{\b\f1 tamp\'eb }{\i\f1 -TAP}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BLOOD }{\b\f1 serc\'eb }{\i\f1 (so according to Silm appendix; Etym has }{\b\i\f1 y\'e1r }{\i\f1 [}{\b\i\f1 yar-}{\i\f1 ]) -Silm:437, YAR
\par   }{\f1 BLOSSOM (white) }{\b\f1 loss\'eb}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 ("of flowers in bunches or clusters":) }{\b\f1 *loht\'eb }{\i\f1 (corrected from the actual reading }{\b\i\f1 lokt\'eb }{\i\f1 because Tolkien later decided that }{\b\i\f1 kt }{\i\f1 became }{
\b\i\f1 ht }{\i\f1 in Quenya.)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -LOT, LT1:258}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BLOT }{\b\f1 motto }{\i\f1 -MBOTH}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BLUE }{\b\f1 luin}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 #luin\'eb }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 luini }{\i\f1 in Nam; Etym and LT1:262 have }{\b\i\f1 l\'fan\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ninwa}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ulban }{\i\f1 (adopted from Valarin; only used in Vanyarin Quenya)}{
\f1 ,}{\i\f1  }{\f1 PALE BLUE }{\b\f1 helwa }{\i\f1  -Nam/LT2:340, LT1:262, LUG, WJ:399, 3EL }{\f1 
\par   BOAT }{\b\f1 lunt\'eb}{\f1 ; SMALL BOAT }{\b\f1 ven\'eb }{\f1 (vessel, dish) }{\i\f1 -LUT, LT1:254}{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1   BODY }{\b\f1 hroa}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 hroar}{\i\f1  is attested. In MR:330, Tolkien notes that }{\b\i\f1 hroa }{\i\f1 is "roughly but not exactly equivalent to 'body'" [as opposed to "soul"]. }{\b\i\f1 Hroa }{\i\f1 
is also used = "physical matter")}{\f1 , DEAD BODY }{\b\f1 loico }{\f1 (corpse); BODILY }{\b\f1 sarcuva }{\f1 (corporeal); BODY-IMPULSE }{\b\f1 hroafelm\'eb}{\f1  (impulses provided by the body, e.g. physical fear, hunger, thirst, sexual desire) }{\i\f1 
-MR:216, 219; VT39:30, MC:223, LT2:347, VT41:19 cf. 13
\par }{\f1   BOLD }{\b\f1 verya}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 canya }{\f1 BOLDNESS }{\b\f1 veri\'eb}{\i\f1  -BER, KAN}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BOLSTER }{\b\f1 nirwa }{\f1 (cushion) }{\i\f1 -NID}{\f1 
\par   BOND }{\b\f1 n\'fat\'eb }{\f1 (knot), }{\b\f1 v\'e9r\'eb }{\f1 (troth, compact, oath) }{\i\f1 Pl. probably *}{\b\i\f1 v\'e9rer}{\i\f1 , *}{\b\i\f1 n\'fater}{\i\f1  not }{\b\i\f1 *v\'e9ri}{\i\f1 , *}{\b\i\f1 n\'fati}{\i\f1 ; cf. the similar formation }{
\b\i\f1 ty\'e1v\'eb }{\i\f1 "taste", pl }{\b\i\f1 ty\'e1ver}{\i\f1 . -NUT, WED}{\f1 
\par   BONE }{\b\f1 axo }{\i\f1 (pl }{\b\i\f1 axor }{\i\f1 is attested)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -MC:222, 223}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BOOK }{\b\f1 parma}{\f1  (writings); BOOK LANGUAGE }{\i\f1 (=Quenya) }{\b\f1 parmalamb\'eb}{\i\f1  -PAR/UT:219, 460, LT2:346}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BORDER }{\b\f1 r\'e9na}{\f1  (edge, margin); }{\b\f1 r\'edma }{\f1 (edge, hem) }{\i\f1 -REG, R\'ee}{\f1 
\par   BORN #}{\b\f1 n\'f3na }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 Apan\'f3nar}{\i\f1 , the "Afterborn") -Silm:122/381
\par   }{\f1 BORNE }{\b\f1 colla }{\i\f1 (pa.p. of }{\b\i\f1 col- }{\i\f1 "bear") }{\f1 (worn). }{\i\f1 Also used as a noun = "vestment, cloak". -MR:385
\par   }{\f1 BOSOM }{\b\f1 pal\'far\'eb }{\f1 (surface, bosom of earth), }{\b\f1 s\'fama }{\f1 (hollow cavity) }{\i\f1 -PAL, MC:223
\par   }{\f1 BOSS OF SHIELD }{\b\f1 tolmen }{\f1 (isolated round hill) }{\i\f1 -LT1:269}{\f1 
\par   BOTH }{\b\f1 y\'fayo }{\i\f1 -Y\'db}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BOUND }{\b\f1 nauta }{\f1 (obliged) }{\i\f1 -NUT}{\f1 
\par   BOW }{\i\f1 (vb)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 cawin }{\i\f1 ("I bow", 1st pers. aorist); }{\f1 BOW }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 quinga}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 c\'fa}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (also = crescent Moon)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 l\'fava}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 c\'fan\'eb }{\f1 (crescent); RAINBOW }{
\b\f1 helyanw\'eb }{\f1 ("sky-bridge"), }{\b\f1 Ilweran}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Ilweranta}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (LT2:348 has }{\b\i\f1 iluquinga}{\i\f1  "sky-bow", but this word was obsoleted when Tolkien changed the meaning of }{\b\i\f1 ilu }{\i\f1 
from "sky" to "universe".) }{\f1 BOWLEGGED }{\b\f1 quingatelco }{\i\f1 (So it is translated, but this must really be a noun: "bow-leg" [}{\b\i\f1 quinga + telco}{\i\f1 ]. No Quenya adjectives end in -}{\b\i\f1 o}{\i\f1 
, unless this is the only one. Read *}{\b\i\f1 quingatelca }{\i\f1 for "bow-legged"? Cf. one of the other words from the same source, }{\b\i\f1 sincahonda}{\i\f1 , changed from }{\b\i\f1 sincahondo }{\i\f1 in an earli
er draft - but at that time Tolkien had already omitted }{\b\i\f1 quingatelco }{\i\f1 and hence did not change its ending: See SD:72.) -LT1:257, SD 68, 72, KWIG, KU3, LT1:256, LotR:1154, LT1:271
\par   }{\f1 BOWL }{\b\f1 fion }{\i\f1 (goblet)}{\f1 , #}{\b\f1 salp\'eb }{\f1 (isolated from }{\b\f1 tanyasalp\'eb }{\f1 "Bowl of Fire")}{\i\f1  -LT1:253, 292
\par   }{\f1 BRANCH }{\b\f1 olwa }{\i\f1 -G\'d3LOB}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BRAND }{\b\f1 yulma }{\i\f1 (Note: a homophone means "cup".) }{\f1 -}{\i\f1 YUL cf. Nam}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BREAD }{\b\f1 masta}{\f1 ;}{\b\f1  }{\f1 LIFE-BREAD }{\i\f1 (= lembas) }{\b\f1 coimas}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (prob. *}{\b\i\f1 coimast}{\i\f1 -, cf. }{\b\i\f1 masta }{\i\f1 "bread") -MBAS, Silm:406/429    }{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BREAK }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 rac- }{\i\f1 (past participle }{\b\i\f1 r\'e1cina }{\i\f1 "broken" is attested)}{\f1 ;}{\b\f1  }{\f1 BREAK APART }{\b\f1 terhat- }{\i\f1 (pa.t. }{\b\f1 terhant\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 ; BREAK ASUNDER }{\b\f1 hat- }{\f1 (pa.t. 
}{\b\f1 hant\'eb}{\f1 )}{\i\f1  -MC:223, SKAT
\par }{\f1   BREATH }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 hwesta }{\f1 (breeze, puff of air), }{\b\f1 s\'fal\'eb }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (spirit) }{\i\f1 (earlier [MET] form }{\b\i\f1 th\'fal\'eb}{\i\f1  = }{\b\i\f1 \'de\'fal\'eb}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 ;}{\f1 
 BREATHE }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 s\'faya- }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ); BREATHER }{\b\f1 S\'falimo }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (a title of Manw\'eb; this is the literal meaning according to Silm:420)}{\f1 ; BREATH FORTH }{\i\f1 
see EXPIRE. -SWES, TH\'db/LotR:1157}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BREEZE }{\b\f1 hwesta }{\f1 (breath, puff of air), GENTLE BREEZE }{\b\f1 v\'edl\'eb}{\f1 ; BREEZY }{\b\f1 vilin }{\f1 (airy) }{\i\f1 -SWES, LotR:1157, LT1:273}{\f1 
\par   BRIDE }{\b\f1 indis }{\f1 (wife) }{\i\f1 (This word may obsolete }{\b\i\f1 akairis }{\i\f1 in LT1:252) -NDIS/UT:8}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BRIDEGROOM }{\b\f1 ender }{\i\f1 -NDER}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BRIDGE }{\b\f1 yanw\'eb }{\f1 (joining, isthmus), }{\b\f1 yanta }{\f1 (yoke) }{\i\f1 -YAT, LotR:1157}{\f1 
\par   BRILLIANCE }{\b\f1 alcar}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 alcar\'eb }{\f1 (splendour, radiance), }{\b\f1 calass\'eb}{\f1  (clarity); BRILLIANT }{\b\f1 alcarinqua }{\f1 (glorious) }{\i\f1 -AKLA-R-/RGEO:73/UT:317/WJ:369/Silm:427, GL:39
\par   }{\f1 BROAD }{\i\f1 - LT2:338 gives a word }{\b\i\f1 aica}{\i\f1  "broad, vast", but this is probably obsoleted by }{\b\i\f1 aica }{\i\f1 "sharp, fell, terrible, dire" in later writings. }{\f1 
\par   BROAD SWORD }{\b\f1 lango }{\f1 (}{\i\f1 also =}{\f1  prow of ship), BROAD-BLADED SWORD }{\b\f1 ecet}{\f1  (short stabbing sword) }{\i\f1 -LAG, UT:284/432}{\f1 
\par   BROKEN }{\b\f1 r\'e1cina }{\i\f1 -MC:223}{\f1 
\par   BROOCH }{\b\f1 tancil }{\f1 (pin) }{\i\f1 -TAK}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1   }{\f1 BROOD }{\b\f1 luvu- }{\f1 (lower) }{\i\f1 -LT1:259}{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1   BROOK }{\b\f1 nell\'eb }{\i\f1 (GL:46 has }{\b\i\f1 went\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -NEN
\par }{\b\f1   }{\f1 BROTHER }{\b\f1 toron}{\f1  (pl. }{\b\f1 torni}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (= natural brother)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 otorno }{\f1 sworn brother, associate BROTHERHOOD }{\b\f1 on\'f3ro }{\i\f1 (of bloodkinship)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 otornass\'eb }{\i\f1 
(the latter is evidently the "brotherhood" of }{\b\i\f1 otornor, }{\i\f1 sworn brothers) -TOR, N\'d4
\par   }{\f1 BROWN }{\b\f1 varn\'eb }{\f1 (swart, dark brown) }{\i\f1 (in compounds }{\b\f1 varni-}{\i\f1 ) -BAR\'c1N}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BUD }{\b\f1 tuima}{\f1  (sprout); BUDDING }{\i\f1 see SPRING-TIME.}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -TUY, LT1:269
\par   }{\f1 BUFFET }{\b\f1 taran}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tarambo }{\i\f1 -LT2:337}{\f1 
\par   BUILD }{\b\f1 carin }{\i\f1 ("I make, build", 1st pers. aorist -}{\f1  }{\i\f1 according to FS and SD:246 the past tense is }{\b\i\f1 c\'e1r\'eb}{\i\f1 , but Etym has }{\b\i\f1 carn\'eb}{\i\f1 
; writers should probably use the latter (not to be confused with the adjective }{\b\i\f1 carn\'eb }{\i\f1 "red". Past participle #}{\b\i\f1 carna *}{\i\f1 "built, made" is attested in }{\b\i\f1 Vincarna }{\i\f1 *"newly-made" in MR:305.) }{\f1 BUILDING }{
\b\f1 car }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 card-}{\f1 ) (house), }{\b\f1 ampano }{\f1 (= especially building of wood, wooden hall), }{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 ataqu\'eb }{\f1 (construction); BUILDER }{\b\f1 samno }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (carpenter, wright)}{\i\f1 
 -KAR, PAN, TAK, STAB}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 BULL }{\b\f1 tarucco}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tarunco }{\i\f1 -LT2:347
\par   }{\f1 BUNCHES (of flowers) }{\i\f1 see BLOSSOM.
\par }{\f1   BURDEN }{\b\f1 c\'f3lo}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (VT39:10)}{\f1 
\par   BURDENSOME }{\b\f1 lumna }{\f1 (lying heavy, oppressive, ominous) }{\i\f1 -DUB}{\f1 
\par   BURLY }{\b\f1 polda }{\f1 (strong) }{\i\f1 -POL}{\f1 
\par   BURN }{\b\f1 usta-}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 (transitive, e.g. *}{\b\i\f1 F\'eban\'e1ro ustan\'eb i ciryar }{\i\f1 "F\'ebanor burnt the ships")}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 urya- }{\i\f1 (intransitive, e.g. }{\b\i\f1 *i ciryar uryaner }{\i\f1 
"the ships were burning") -LT1:271}{\f1 
\par   BUSH }{\b\f1 tussa }{\i\f1 -TUS}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 BUT }{\b\f1 nan }{\i\f1 (so in Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 and F\'edriel's Song; Etym has }{\b\i\f1 n\'e1}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 n\'e1n}{\i\f1 . }{\b\i\f1 N\'e1 }{\i\f1 clashes with }{\b\i\f1 n\'e1 }{\i\f1 "is"); }{\b\f1 er }{\f1 
(only, one, alone, but, still); BUT YET }{\b\f1 a-nanta}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ananta }{\f1 (and yet) }{\i\f1 -NDAN, LT1:269, Nam/FS
\par   }{\f1 BUTTERFLY }{\b\f1 wilwarin }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 wilwarind-}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 -WIL/MC:222, 223/LT1:273
\par }{\f1   BUTTOCKS }{\b\f1 hacca }{\f1 (hams) }{\i\f1 -GL:47
\par  -}{\f1 BY}{\b\f1 -mas}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 (final element in place-names, see -TON) -LT1:250}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1  
\par }{\f1 
\par  }{\b\f1\fs24  <C>}{\f1 
\par   CALACIRIAN }{\b\f1 Calaciryan}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (prob. *}{\b\i\f1 Calaciryand-}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 full form}{\f1  }{\b\f1 Calaciryand\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (i.e., "the region of }{\f1 Eldamar...}{\i\f1 in and near the entrance to the ravine [of Calacirya],
 where the Light was brighter and the land more beautiful") -RGEO:70 cf. LotR:252}{\f1 
\par   CALL }{\b\f1 yello }{\f1 (shouth of triumph) }{\i\f1 -GYEL}{\f1 
\par   CANDLE }{\b\f1 l\'edcuma }{\f1 (taper) }{\i\f1 -MC:223}{\f1 
\par   CANOPY }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 telta- }{\f1 (overshadow, screen), CANOPY }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 telimbo }{\f1 (sky) }{\i\f1 -TEL, LT1:268
\par   }{\f1 CANNIBAL-OGRES }{\b\f1 Sarquindi }{\f1 (sg #}{\b\f1 Sarquind\'eb}{\f1 ?) }{\i\f1 -LT2:347 }{\f1 
\par   CAPE }{\b\f1 mundo }{\f1 (nose, snout) }{\i\f1 (Note: }{\b\i\f1 mundo}{\i\f1  also means "ox".) -MBUD
\par   }{\f1 CARANTHIR }{\b\f1 Morifinw\'eb}{\f1 , short form }{\b\f1 Moryo }{\i\f1 (not equivalent in sense to his Sindarin name, which is the cognate of his "mother-name" [q.v.] }{\b\i\f1 Carnistir}{\i\f1 .) -PM:353
\par   }{\f1 CARCANET }{\b\f1 firinga }{\f1 (necklace) }{\i\f1 -LT2:346/GL:36}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 CAROUSAL }{\b\f1 yulm\'eb }{\f1 (drinking) }{\i\f1 (Note: a homophone means "smouldering heat") -WJ:416
\par }{\f1   CARPENTER }{\b\f1 samno }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (wright, builder) }{\i\f1 -STAB
\par   }{\f1 CARRY }{\i\f1 - GL:38 has }{\b\i\f1 yulu}{\i\f1 -, but in WJ:416 the same stem (there spelt }{\b\i\f1 JULU}{\i\f1 ) is said to mean "drink", indicating that }{\b\i\f1 yulu}{\i\f1 
- "carry" had probably been abandoned in Tolkien's later Quenya. Use rather #}{\b\i\f1 col}{\i\f1 -; see BEAR.
\par   }{\f1 CART }{\b\f1 noroll\'eb}{\i\f1  -GL:31
\par  ?}{\f1 CASSIOPEIA }{\b\f1 Wilwarin}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (the identification of this constellation is not certain. }{\b\i\f1 Wilwarin }{\i\f1 means "butterfly".) -Silm:426
\par   }{\f1 CASTLE OF CUSTODY - }{\i\f1 this is mentioned as the approximate meaning of }{\b\i\f1 Mandos }{\i\f1 (stem }{\b\i\f1 Mandost}{\i\f1 -) -MR:350
\par   }{\f1 CAT }{\b\f1 m\'eboi }{\f1 -}{\i\f1 LT2:348}{\f1 
\par   CATCH }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 atsa }{\f1 (hook, claw) }{\i\f1 -GAT}{\f1 
\par   CAUSE }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 tyar-}{\i\f1  -KYAR}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 CAVE }{\b\f1 felya}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 rondo}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 rotel\'eb}{\f1 ; ARTIFICIAL CAVE }{\b\f1 hr\'f3ta}{\f1  (dwelling underground, rockhewn hall) }{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -PH\'c9LEG, ROD, LT2:347, PM:365}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 CAVITY }{\i\f1 (hollow) }{\b\f1 s\'fama }{\f1 (bosom) }{\i\f1 -MC:223}{\f1 
\par   CEASE }{\b\f1 hauta- }{\f1 (take a rest, stop), }{\b\f1 pusta- }{\f1 (stop, put a stop to), }{\b\f1 tyel- }{\f1 (end) }{\i\f1 -KHAW, PUS, KYEL
\par   }{\f1 CELEBORN }{\b\f1 Telporno }{\i\f1 (Letters:425) or }{\b\f1 Teleporno }{\i\f1 (UT:266). (The latter is stated to be the Telerin form, while }{\b\i\f1 Telporno }{\i\f1 must be the form used in Noldorin Quenya. Cf. }{\b\i\f1 Alt\'e1riel }{\i\f1 vs. }
{\b\i\f1 Alat\'e1riel}{\i\f1 ; see GALADRIEL.)
\par }{\f1   CELEBRIMBOR }{\i\f1 (= "Silver-fist") }{\b\f1 Telperinquar }{\i\f1 (possibly }{\b\i\f1 *Telperinqu\'e1r-}{\i\f1 . Cf. }{\b\i\f1 qu\'e1r\'eb}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 "fist"). -Silm:429
\par   }{\f1 CELEGORM }{\b\f1 Turcafinw\'eb}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 short form }{\b\f1 Turco }{\i\f1 (not equivalent in sense to his Sindarin name, which is a cognate of his mother-name [q.v.] }{\b\i\f1 Tyelcormo }{\i\f1 
"hasty-riser"; the latter name was "never used in narrative".) -PM:352, 353
\par   }{\f1 CELOS }{\b\f1 Celuss\'eb }{\i\f1 (see UT:426)}{\b\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1   }{\f1 CENTRE }{\b\f1 end\'eb}{\f1  (core, middle). }{\i\f1 (The form }{\b\i\f1 end\'eb}{\i\f1  is probably to be preferred to }{\b\i\f1 ent\'eb}{\i\f1  in one late source.)}{\f1  Early material also has }{\b\f1 t\'f3l\'eb}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 -N\'c9
D, \'c9NED, VT41:16, LT1:269
\par   }{\f1 CENTURY }{\b\f1 harany\'eb }{\i\f1 (or perhaps it means the last day of a century - Tolkien's wording is not clear. The latter interpretation may be more likely.) -LotR:1142}{\f1 
\par   CHAIN }{\b\f1 Angainor }{\i\f1 (= "The Great Chain" with which Morgoth was twice bound; LT1:249 has the form }{\b\i\f1 Angaino}{\i\f1 )}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 -Silm:59
\par   }{\f1 CHAMBER }{\b\f1 samb\'eb }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (-}{\b\i\f1 san,}{\i\f1  -}{\b\i\f1 samb}{\i\f1 -}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 in compounds; cf. BEDCHAMBER) }{\f1 (room) }{\i\f1 -STAB}{\f1 
\par   CHAMPION }{\b\f1 ar\'e1to }{\f1 (eminent man) }{\i\f1 -Silm:428
\par   }{\f1 CHANGE }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\f1 #}{\b\f1 ahya}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (only pa.t. }{\b\i\f1 ahyan\'eb }{\i\f1 is attested) -PM:395
\par }{\f1   CHANNEL }{\b\f1 celma }{\i\f1 -KEL}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 CHANT }{\b\f1 lirin }{\i\f1 ("I chant", 1st pers. aorist)}{\f1  (sing) }{\i\f1 -LIR}{\i\f1\fs12 1
\par }{\f1   CHEESE }{\b\f1 tyur}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 tyurd}{\f1 -) }{\i\f1 (QL:50; }{\b\i\f1 tyuru}{\i\f1 - in GL:28 is actually a verb "to 'turn' milk"; cf. QL:50.)}{\f1 
\par   CHERRY }{\b\f1 pio }{\i\f1 (this word was also applied to plums)}{\f1 . CHERRY TREE }{\b\f1 aipio}{\i\f1  (also used = "plum tree"???) -LT2:347, GL:18}{\f1 
\par   CHIEF }{\i\f1 (adj) }{\b\f1 h\'e9ra }{\f1 (principal); CHIEF }{\i\f1 (noun) #}{\b\f1 turco }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 Turcomund }{\i\f1 "chief of bulls, *chief bull"; this may not be pure Quenya, but }{\b\i\f1 Turco }{\i\f1 
appears as a the short name of }{\b\i\f1 Turcafinw\'eb}{\i\f1 , Celegorm's Quenya name - though that is translated "strong, powerful (in body)" rather than referring to more "political" power)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -KHER, Letters:423, PM:352}{\f1 
\par   CHIEFTAIN }{\b\f1 haran }{\f1 (pl }{\b\f1 harni}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (in Etym also = king, but in LotR and other texts the Quenya word for "king" is }{\b\i\f1 aran }{\i\f1 pl. }{\b\i\f1 arani }{\i\f1 - see KING)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 c\'e1no}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 c\'e1nu}{
\f1  }{\i\f1 (see COMMANDER)}{\f1  (ruler, governor, commander)}{\i\f1  -3AR, UT:400
\par   }{\f1 CHILD }{\b\f1 h\'edna}{\i\f1 , also vocative }{\b\i\f1 hina }{\i\f1 with a short vowel, used when addressing a (young) child. }{\f1 Pl. }{\b\f1 h\'edni }{\f1 rather than }{\b\f1 h\'ednar}{\f1 ; see CHILDREN OF IL\'daVATAR below. }{\i\f1 
"Child" as the last element in compounds: }{\b\i\f1 -hin}{\i\f1  (-}{\b\i\f1 h\'edn}{\i\f1 -, pl. -}{\b\i\f1 h\'edni}{\i\f1 ), e.g. }{\f1 CHILDREN OF ERU }{\b\f1 Eruh\'edni}{\i\f1  }{\f1 from sg. #}{\b\f1 Eruhin}{\f1 ;}{\i\f1  }{\f1 CHILDREN OF IL\'da
VATAR }{\b\f1 H\'edni Il\'favataro}{\f1 ; MY CHILD }{\b\f1 hinya }{\i\f1 (short for }{\b\i\f1 hinanya}{\i\f1 ). (For "child", Etym also has }{\b\i\f1 seld\'eb}{\i\f1 ; Tolkien changed the meaning from "daughter".)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 
-WJ:403, Silm:387/432, SEL-D-
\par   }{\f1 CHILL }{\b\f1 ninqu\'eb }{\f1 (pallid, white); BE CHILL }{\i\f1 (of weather) }{\b\f1 nicu- }{\f1 (be cold) }{\i\f1 -WJ:417 cf. NIK-W- 
\par   }{\f1 CHILLY }{\b\f1 ringa }{\f1 (damp, cold) }{\i\f1 -LT1:265
\par   }{\f1 CHOKE }{\b\f1 quoro- }{\f1 (suffocate), CHOKED }{\b\f1 quorin }{\f1 (drowned) }{\i\f1 -LT1:264}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 CHOOSING }{\b\f1 #cilm\'eb }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 Essecilm\'eb }{\i\f1 "name-choosing", q.v.) -MR:214}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 CHRONOLOGICAL ACCOUNT }{\b\f1 l\'famequenta }{\f1 (history) }{\i\f1 -LU}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 CIRCLE }{\b\f1 rind\'eb}{\f1 ;}{\b\f1  }{\f1 CIRCULAR }{\b\f1 rinda}{\f1 ;}{\b\f1  }{\f1 CIRCULAR ENCLOSURE }{\i\f1 ("especially on a hill-top") }{\b\f1 corin }{\i\f1 -RIN, KOR/LT1:257}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 CITY }{\b\f1 osto }{\f1 (town with wall round) }{\i\f1 -OS}{\f1 
\par   CLAD }{\b\f1 vaina }{\i\f1 -LT1:272}{\f1 
\par   CLAMOUR }{\b\f1 yalm\'eb }{\i\f1 -NGYAL (see NGAL)}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 CLAN }{\b\f1 noss\'eb }{\f1 (family, "house") }{\i\f1 -N\'d4
\par   }{\f1 CLARITY }{\b\f1 calass\'eb}{\i\f1  }{\f1 (brilliance) }{\i\f1 -GL:39
\par   }{\f1 CLASP }{\b\f1 tangwa }{\f1 (hasp) -}{\i\f1 TAK}{\f1 
\par   CLAW }{\b\f1 atsa }{\f1 (hook, catch), #}{\b\f1 racca }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 raccalepta}{\i\f1 , see below); }{\f1 CLAW-FINGERED }{\b\f1 raccalepta}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -GAT, SD:68, 72}{\f1 
\par   CLEAN }{\b\f1 poica }{\i\f1 -POY}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 CLEARED }{\i\f1 (of land) }{\b\f1 latin}{\f1 ,}{\b\f1  latina }{\f1 (free, open) }{\i\f1 -LAT}{\f1 
\par   CLEAVE }{\b\f1 hyarin }{\i\f1 ("I cleave", 1st pers. aorist)}{\f1 , CLEAVER }{\b\f1 #hyando }{\i\f1 in}{\f1  }{\b\f1 Sangahyando }{\f1 "Throng-cleaver, Cleaver of throngs" }{\i\f1 -SYAD, LT2:342, LotR:1085 cf. Letters:425}{\f1 
\par   CLEAVE TO }{\b\f1 himya- }{\f1 (abide by, stick to) }{\i\f1 -KHIM}{\f1 
\par   CLEFT }{\b\f1 y\'e1w\'eb }{\f1 (ravine, gulf); }{\b\f1 sanca }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (split), }{\b\f1 hyats\'eb }{\f1 (gash), }{\b\f1 ciris }{\f1 (crack), }{\b\f1 falqua}{\f1  (mountain pass, ravine), }{\b\f1 cilya }{\f1 
(gorge, pass between hills) }{\i\f1 (so in Etym, but }{\b\i\f1 cirya }{\i\f1 in the name }{\b\i\f1 Calacirya }{\i\f1 "Pass of Light" [gen. }{\b\i\f1 Calaciryo }{\i\f1 in Nam\'e1ri\'eb] - though this clashes with }{\b\i\f1 cirya }{\i\f1 
"ship". An early version of Nam\'e1ri\'eb actually had }{\b\i\f1 Calacilyo}{\i\f1 ,}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 not }{\b\i\f1 Calaciryo}{\i\f1 ; see An Introduction to Elvish p. 5.) -YAG, STAK, SYAD, RGEO:70/WJ:403, LT2:337, 341, KIL
\par   }{\f1 CLIFF }{\b\f1 ollo }{\f1 (seaward precipice) }{\i\f1 (The alternative form }{\b\i\f1 old\'f3}{\i\f1  may be archaic Quenya.) -LT1:252
\par   }{\f1 CLOAK }{\b\f1 colla }{\f1 (vestment, }{\i\f1 actually a past participle "borne, worn" used as a noun).}{\f1  GREY-CLOAK }{\b\f1 Sindacollo}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Singollo }{\i\f1 (so in Silm:421; MR:217 has }{\b\i\f1 Sindicollo}{\i\f1 . Note that }{
\b\i\f1 colla }{\i\f1 has become #}{\b\i\f1 collo }{\i\f1 because }{\b\i\f1 -o }{\i\f1 is a masculine ending.)}{\f1  (Thingol) }{\i\f1 -MR:385}{\f1 
\par   CLOSED }{\b\f1 pahta}{\f1  (NOT CLOSED - }{\i\f1 see}{\f1  OPEN) }{\i\f1 -VT39:23}{\f1  
\par   CLOTH }{\b\f1 lann\'eb }{\f1 (tissue) }{\i\f1 -LAN}{\f1 
\par   CLOUD }{\b\f1 fanya}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (white cloud; pl. }{\b\i\f1 fanyar }{\i\f1 is attested),}{\f1  }{\b\f1 lumbo }{\f1 (}{\i\f1 pl }{\b\i\f1 lumbor }{\i\f1 is attested. In LT1:259, it is stated that this word applies to a "dark lowering cloud"),}{\f1  }{
\b\f1 ungo}{\b\i\f1  }{\f1 (dark shadow)}{\i\f1 . (In ancient times the Elves probably also used the word }{\b\i\f1 fana }{\i\f1 [in Etym }{\b\i\f1 f\'e1na}{\i\f1 
] for "cloud" or "veil", but in Quenya it came to denote the visible bodies in which the Valar manifested themselves to incarnates. When }{\b\i\f1 fana }{\i\f1 no longer meant "cloud", this meaning was evidently transferred to the derivative }{\b\i\f1 
fanya}{\i\f1 , originally probably meaning "white" or "white thing".) }{\f1 UPPER AIRS AND CLOUDS }{\b\f1 fanyar\'eb }{\f1 (skies)}{\i\f1  -SPAN, MC:222, U\'d1G, Nam, RGEO:67, SYAD, RGEO:74, MC:223
\par   }{\f1 CLUSTERS (of flowers) }{\i\f1 see BLOSSOM.
\par }{\f1   COAT }{\b\f1 vacco}{\f1  (jacket) }{\i\f1 -GL:21
\par   }{\f1 COBWEB }{\b\f1 l\'edn\'eb }{\i\f1 -SLIG}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 CODE OF SIGNS }{\b\f1 tengwesta }{\f1 (system of signs, grammar); GESTURE-CODE }{\b\f1 hwerm\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -WJ:394 cf. TEK, WJ:395}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 COLD }{\i\f1 (adj) }{\b\f1 ringa }{\i\f1 (so in MC:222 and LT1:265; Etym has }{\b\i\f1 ring\'eb}{\i\f1 , which is also a noun meaning "cold lake/pool in the mountains")}{\f1 , (damp, chilly), }{\b\f1 yelwa}{\f1 ; COLD }{\i\f1 (noun?) }{\b\f1 niqu
\'eb}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 also vb }{\b\i\f1 niqu\'eb- }{\i\f1 "it is cold, it freezes"}{\f1 ;}{\i\f1  }{\f1 BE COLD, CHILL }{\i\f1 (of weather) }{\b\f1 nicu- }{\i\f1 -MC:222, RINGI, LT1:260, WJ:417
\par   }{\f1 COLLAPSE }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 talta}{\f1 - (slip, slide down), COLLAPSE }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 atalant\'eb }{\f1 (downfall) }{\i\f1 -MC:223
\par   }{\f1 COLLECT }{\b\f1 hosta- }{\f1 (gather, assemble); COLLECTION OF LEAVES }{\b\f1 olassi\'eb }{\f1 (foliage) }{\i\f1 -KHOTH/MC:223, Letters:282}{\f1 
\par   COME #}{\b\f1 tul}{\f1 -}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (given as }{\b\i\f1 tulin}{\i\f1  "I come", 1st pers. aorist)}{\f1 ; }{\i\f1 perfect }{\b\i\f1 #ut\'fali\'eb }{\i\f1 and future #}{\b\i\f1 tuluva }{\i\f1 are attested (the latter in }{\b\i\f1 entuluva }{\i\f1 
"shall come again". }{\b\i\f1 Tulin }{\i\f1 obsoletes }{\b\i\f1 tulu- }{\i\f1 in LT1:270). }{\f1 COME AWAY }{\b\f1 h\'f3tuli- }{\i\f1 
("so as to leave a place or group and join another in the thought or place of the speaker") -TUL, LotR:1003, Silm:229, WJ:368}{\f1 
\par   COMMAND }{\b\f1 can}{\f1 - (so when used of persons; when used with things as object, this verb means }{\i\f1 demand}{\f1 ) -}{\i\f1 PM:361-362}{\f1  (where only a stem }{\i\f1 KAN}{\f1  is mentioned)
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 COMMANDER }{\b\f1 c\'e1no}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("usually as the title of a lesser chief, especially one acting as the deputy of one higher in rank", PM:345) }{\f1 (governor, chieftain, commander) }{\i\f1 -PM:345
\par   }{\f1 COMMANDMENT }{\b\f1 axan }{\f1 (law, rule, as primarily proceeding from Eru). Pl. }{\b\f1 axani}{\f1  is attested. }{\i\f1 -WJ:399, VT39:30, 23}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 COMMERSE }{\b\f1 mancal\'eb }{\i\f1 -MBAKH}{\b\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 COMMUNICATION }{\b\f1 centa }{\i\f1 (as in }{\b\i\f1 \'d3sanw\'eb-centa}{\i\f1 , Communication of Thought. In other contexts, }{\b\i\f1 centa }{\i\f1 must be translated "enquiry" or *"essay") -MR:415, VT39:23
\par }{\b\f1   }{\f1 COMPACT }{\b\f1 v\'e9r\'eb }{\f1 (troth, oath, bond) }{\i\f1 Pl. probably *}{\b\i\f1 v\'e9rer}{\i\f1  not }{\b\i\f1 *v\'e9ri}{\i\f1 ; cf. the similar formation }{\b\i\f1 ty\'e1v\'eb }{\i\f1 "taste", pl }{\b\i\f1 ty\'e1ver}{\i\f1 .) -WED}{
\f1 
\par   COMPEL }{\b\f1 mauya-}{\f1 ; COMPULSION }{\b\f1 mausta }{\i\f1 -MBAW
\par   }{\f1 COMPLAINT }{\b\f1 nur }{\f1 (growl) }{\i\f1 -LT1:263
\par   }{\f1 COMPLETELY }{\b\f1 aqua }{\f1 (fully, altogether, wholly) }{\i\f1 -WJ:392}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 CONCEAL }{\b\f1 halya- }{\f1 (veil, screen from light)}{\i\f1  -SKAL}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 CONCEALED }{\b\f1 furin}{\f1  }{\i\f1 or }{\b\f1 hurin }{\f1 (hidden) }{\i\f1 -LT2:340}{\b\f1  }{\f1 
\par   CONCEPTION }{\b\f1 n\'f3a}{\f1  (pl. }{\b\f1 n\'f3wi}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 n\'f3 }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 n\'f3w-}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 -NOWO
\par }{\f1   CONCH }{\b\f1 hyalma }{\f1 (shell, horn of Ulmo) }{\i\f1 -SYAL
\par   }{\f1 CONCLUDE  }{\b\f1 telya- }{\f1 (}{\i\f1 transitive) }{\f1 (wind up, finish); CONCLUSION }{\b\f1 telma }{\i\f1 (further defined as "anything used to finish off a work or an affair") -WJ:411}{\f1 
\par   CONFUSED }{\b\f1 r\'facina }{\f1 (shattered, disordered) }{\i\f1 -MC:223}{\f1 
\par CONSONANT #}{\b\f1 pataca}{\f1  (only pl. }{\b\f1 patacar}{\f1  is attested), #}{\b\f1 lambetengw\'eb}{\f1  (literally "tongue-sign"; only pl. }{\b\f1 lambetengwi}{\f1  is attested; this refers to consonants as }{\i\f1 tengwi}{\f1  or phonemes), also }{
\b\f1 n\'e1va-tengw\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("\'f1ava-")}{\f1  (literally "mouth-sign"; only pl. }{\b\f1 n\'e1va-tengwi}{\f1  is attested; the shorter form #}{\b\f1 n\'e1v\'eba}{\f1  pl. }{\b\f1 n\'e1v\'ebar}{\f1  was also used, but F\'eb
anor replaced these terms with #}{\b\f1 pataca}{\f1 ). Yet another term for "consonant" was #}{\b\f1 tapta tengw\'eb}{\f1  "impeded element". (Only pl. }{\b\f1 tapta tengwi}{\f1  is attested; we would rather expect *}{\b\f1 tapt\'eb tengwi}{\f1 
 with the pl. form of the adjective. The nominal pl. of the adjective, }{\b\f1 taptar}{\f1 , was used in the same sense as }{\b\f1 tapta tengwi}{\f1 .) }{\i\f1 Tolkien also notes: }{\f1 
"Since...in the mode of spelling commonly used the full signs were consonantal, in ordinary non-technical use }{\i\f1 tengwar [sg }{\b\i\f1 tengwa}{\i\f1 , see LETTER]}{\f1  became equivalent to 'consonants'." }{\i\f1 Cf. also }{\b\i\f1 surya }{\i\f1 
"spirant consonant" and }{\b\i\f1 punta }{\i\f1 "stopped consonant". -VT39:8, VT39:16, 17, WJ:396, SUS, PUT (see PUS)}{\b\i\f1 
\par   }{\f1 CONSPICOUS }{\b\f1 minda }{\f1 (prominent) }{\i\f1 -MIN}{\f1 
\par   CONSTRUCTION }{\b\f1 tanw\'eb }{\f1 (craft, thing made, construction, devise), }{\b\f1 ataqu\'eb }{\f1 (building) }{\i\f1 -TAN, TAK}{\f1 
\par   CONTEMPTIBLE }{\b\f1 faica }{\f1 (mean) }{\i\f1 -SPAY}{\f1 
\par   CONTINUAL }{\b\f1 vorima }{\f1 (repeated); CONTINUALLY }{\b\f1 voro }{\i\f1 (also }{\b\i\f1 voro- }{\i\f1 in compounds) -BOR}{\f1 
\par   CONTINUANT - the term #}{\b\f1 muss\'eb tengw\'eb}{\f1  "soft element" (only attested in the pl.: }{\b\f1 muss\'eb tengwi}{\f1 ) covers vowels, semi-vowels (}{\i\f1 y}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 w}{\f1 ) and continuants (}{\i\f1 l}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 r}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 m}{
\f1 , }{\i\f1 n}{\f1 ). -}{\i\f1 VT39:17}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 CONTRARY, ON THE - }{\i\f1 see }{\f1 NO
\par   CONTROL #}{\b\f1 tur}{\f1 -}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (given as }{\b\i\f1 turin}{\i\f1 , "I...control", 1st pers. aorist) }{\f1 (pa.t. }{\b\f1 turn\'eb}{\f1 )}{\b\i\f1  }{\f1 (wield, govern); IN CONTROL OF (possessing) }{\b\f1 arwa }{\i\f1 
(followed by gen, e.g. *}{\b\i\f1 i heru arwa i nerion }{\i\f1 "the lord in control of the men") -TUR, 3AR
\par   }{\f1 COOKED FOOD }{\b\f1 apsa }{\f1 (meat) -}{\i\f1 AP}{\f1  
\par   COPING-STONE }{\i\f1 see FINISH.
\par  }{\f1  COPPER }{\b\f1 urus}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 urust}{\f1 -), cf. POLISHED COPPER }{\b\f1 calarus}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 calarust}{\f1 -). In the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1 , the word }{\b\f1 rauta}{\f1 
 was originally defined "copper", but Tolkien changed the definition to "metal" in general. The earliers material has COPPER = }{\b\f1 tamb\'eb}{\f1 ;}{\b\f1  }{\f1 OF COPPER }{\b\f1 tambina}{\f1 . Etym has}{\i\f1  }{\f1 COPPER-COLOURED }{\b\f1 aira }{
\f1 (ruddy, red) }{\i\f1 -VT41:10, RAUT\'c2, LT1:250, 256, 268, GAY
\par   }{\f1 COPULA }{\b\f1 telluma}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (altered from earlier }{\b\i\f1 telum\'eb }{\i\f1 under influence of a Valarin word; pl. }{\b\i\f1 tellumar }{\i\f1 is attested) }{\f1 (dome), }{\b\f1 coromindo }{\f1 (dome) }{\i\f1 -Nam/WJ:399/411, KOR
\par   }{\f1 CORE }{\b\f1 end\'eb }{\f1 (centre, middle)}{\i\f1 . -N\'c9D, \'c9NED}{\f1 
\par   CORNFLOWER }{\b\f1 menelluin }{\i\f1 (lit. *"sky-blue") -Pictures of J. R. R. Tolkien
\par   }{\f1 CORPOREAL }{\b\f1 sarcuva }{\f1 (bodily) }{\i\f1 -LT2:347}{\f1 
\par   CORPSE }{\b\f1 quelet }{\f1  (pl. }{\b\f1 queletsi}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 loico}{\f1  (dead body); CORPSE-CANDLE}{\b\f1  loicol\'edcuma }{\i\f1 -KWEL, MC:223}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 CORRUSCATION }{\b\f1 russ\'eb }{\f1 (\'86swordblade) }{\i\f1 -RUS
\par   }{\f1 COTTAGE - }{\i\f1 LT2:336 has }{\b\i\f1 os(t) }{\i\f1 "house and cottage", but this word is probably obsolete - }{\b\i\f1 osto }{\i\f1 means "city" or "fortress" in Tolkien's later Quenya. }{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 COUNT - }{\i\f1 the stem }{\b\f1 not- }{\i\f1 can be isolated from the word for "countable", see below. It actually occurs in Etym, but is glossed "reckon" instead}{\f1 . COUNT UP }{\b\f1 onot- }{\i\f1 (cf. }{\b\i\f1 not- }{\i\f1 
"reckon" - the perfect of both these verbs would presumably be *}{\b\i\f1 on\'f3ti\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 , COUNTABLE #}{\b\f1 n\'f3tima }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 \'fan\'f3tim\'eb }{\i\f1 "countless, not-countable, numberless", sg. }{\b\i\f1 \'fan\'f3
tima}{\i\f1 ). }{\f1 NOT COUNTING }{\b\f1 hequa }{\f1 (leaving aside, excluding, except)}{\i\f1  -NOT, Nam, RGEO:67, VT39:14, WJ:364, 365}{\f1 
\par   COUNTLESS }{\b\f1 \'fan\'f3tima}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 \'fan\'f3tim\'eb}{\i\f1  is attested)}{\f1  (numberless, not-countable, uncountable) }{\i\f1 -VT39:14, Nam, RGEO:67
\par   }{\f1 COUNTRY }{\b\f1 n\'f3r\'eb}{\f1  (land, race, nation, native land, family), }{\b\f1 #n\'f3ri\'eb }{\i\f1 (only attested in a compound, in the ablative case: }{\b\i\f1 sindan\'f3riello}{\i\f1 , "grey-country-from", "out of a grey country". -N\'d4
, Nam/RGEO:67}{\f1 
\par   COURAGE }{\b\f1 huor\'eb }{\i\f1 (only attested as a proper name: }{\b\i\f1 Huor\'eb}{\i\f1 , lit. "heart-vigour") -KH\'d4-N
\par   }{\f1 COURSE }{\b\f1 ti\'eb }{\f1 (line, direction, way, path, road) }{\i\f1 -TE3, RGEO:67
\par }{\f1   COURT }{\b\f1 paca}{\f1  (paved floor) }{\i\f1 -GL:63}{\f1 
\par   COVER }{\b\f1 top\'eb }{\i\f1 (aorist sg)}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (pa.t. }{\b\f1 tomp\'eb}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 unt\'fapa-}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 (lit. "down-roof") -TOP, Nam/RGEO:67
\par   }{\f1 COVERING }{\b\f1 telm\'eb }{\f1 (hood) }{\i\f1 -TEL}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 COW }{\i\f1 (milch cow) }{\b\f1 yax\'eb}{\f1 . (An alternative form }{\b\f1 yaxi}{\f1 , simply glossed "cow", looks like a plural in LotR-style Quenya, unless it is a feminine form like }{\b\f1 t\'e1ri}{\f1  "queen" and }{\b\f1 heri}{\f1 
 "lady") -}{\i\f1 GL:36
\par   }{\f1 CRACK }{\b\f1 ciris }{\f1 (cleft) }{\i\f1 -LT2:335}{\f1 
\par   CRAFT }{\b\f1 tanw\'eb }{\f1 (thing made, device, construction); }{\b\f1 curw\'eb}{\f1 . CRAFTSMAN }{\b\f1 tano}{\f1  (smith) }{\i\f1 -KUR}{\f1 
\par   CREATE }{\b\f1 onta }{\i\f1 (pa.t. }{\b\f1 \'f3n\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ontan\'eb}{\i\f1 ) -ONO}{\f1 
\par   CREATURE }{\b\f1 onna}{\f1 ;}{\b\f1  }{\f1 DEFORMED/HIDEOUS CREATURE }{\b\f1 ulundo }{\f1 (monster); VERY TERRIBLE CREATURE }{\b\f1 rauco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -ONO, \'daLUG, VT39:10
\par   }{\f1 CRESCENT }{\b\f1 c\'fan\'eb }{\i\f1 (bow) -LT1:271}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 CREST }{\i\f1 (of wave) }{\b\f1 wing\'eb }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 wingi-}{\f1 ) (foam, spindrift). }{\i\f1 LT1:256 gives }{\b\i\f1 orm\'eb }{\i\f1 "crest, summit", but in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 orm\'eb }{\i\f1 
means "wrath, haste, violence, rushing".}{\f1  CRESTED WAVE }{\b\f1 falma }{\i\f1 -WIG/LT1:273, PHAL}{\f1 
\par   CROOKED }{\b\f1 hwarin}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 raica }{\f1 (bent, wrong), }{\b\f1 rempa }{\f1 (hooked), }{\b\f1 cauca }{\f1 (bent, humped) }{\i\f1 -SKWAR, R\'c1YAK/VT39:7, REP, LT1:260
\par }{\f1   CROSSBAR }{\b\f1 hwarma }{\i\f1 -SKWAR}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 CROSSING }{\b\f1 tarna }{\f1 (passage, #ford) }{\i\f1 -LT2:347}{\f1 
\par   CROW }{\b\f1 qu\'e1co }{\i\f1 (so in WJ:395; Etym has }{\b\i\f1 corco}{\i\f1 )}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 -WJ:395, KORKA (see KARKA)}{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1   CROWD }{\b\f1 sanga }{\f1 (throng, press); }{\b\f1 rimb\'eb }{\f1 (host) }{\i\f1 -STAG/Silm:438, RIM}{\f1 
\par   CROWN }{\b\f1 ri\'eb}{\f1 ; CROWNED }{\b\f1 r\'edna}{\f1 ;}{\b\f1  }{\f1 STAR-CROWNED, CROWNED WITH STARS }{\i\f1 (a name of Taniquetil) }{\b\f1 Elerr\'edna}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 (so in Silm; Etym has }{\b\i\f1 Eler\'edna}{\i\f1 )}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
-RIG, EL, Silm:42}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 CRUEL }{\b\f1 nwalca }{\i\f1 (Though spelt this way also in Etym, }{\b\i\f1 nwalca }{\i\f1 must be from older *}{\b\i\f1 ngwalca}{\i\f1 , for the stem is }{\b\i\f1 \'d1GWAL}{\i\f1 . In Tengwar spelling, the letter }{\b\i\f1 nwalm\'eb }{\i\f1 
(< older }{\b\i\f1 ngwalm\'eb}{\i\f1 ) should be used to transcribe the initial }{\b\i\f1 nw }{\i\f1 of }{\b\i\f1 nwalca}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -\'d1GWAL
\par   }{\f1 CRUMBLE #}{\b\f1 ruxa}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (only part. }{\b\i\f1 ruxala }{\i\f1 is attested) -MC:222 cf 215}{\f1  
\par   CRYSTAL SUBSTANCE }{\b\f1 silima }{\i\f1 (a substance F\'ebanor alone knew how to make; the Silmarils were made of it. Etymologically, the word apparently means simply *"white-shining thing", o
r perhaps *"[substance] apt to shine white".) -RGEO:73, Silm:437
\par   }{\f1 CUNNING }{\i\f1 - LT1:253 has }{\b\i\f1 find\'eb}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 fini\'eb}{\i\f1 , but these words may not be valid in Tolkien's later Quenya (in Etym, }{\b\i\f1 find\'eb }{\i\f1 means "tress, lock of hair").
\par   }{\f1 CUP }{\b\f1 yulma }{\i\f1 -Nam, RGEO:67}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 CUPOLA }{\b\f1 coromindo }{\f1 (dome) }{\i\f1 -KOP
\par   }{\f1 CURUFIN }{\b\f1 Curufinw\'eb}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 short form}{\f1  }{\b\f1 Curvo}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (His "mother-name", never used in narrative, was }{\b\i\f1 Atarinc\'eb}{\i\f1 .) -PM:352, 353
\par   }{\f1 CURUN\'cdR }{\b\f1 Curumo }{\f1 (Saruman) }{\i\f1 -UT:393, 401
\par   }{\f1 CURVED }{\b\f1 c\'fana }{\f1 (bent; }{\b\i\f1 c\'fana }{\i\f1 is also used as a verbal stem, see BEND}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 -MC:223
\par }{\f1   CUSHION }{\b\f1 nirwa }{\i\f1 -NID}{\f1 
\par   CUSTODY }{\b\f1 mando }{\f1 (safe keeping); CASTLE OF CUSTODY }{\b\f1 Mandos }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 Mandost-}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 -MR:350
\par   }{\f1 CUT }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 rista-}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 veni\'eb }{\i\f1 (infinitive? stem #}{\b\i\f1 ven-}{\i\f1 ?) }{\f1 (shape), CUT }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 rista}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 venw\'eb }{\f1 (shape), CUT OFF }{\i\f1 (and get rid of or lose a portion:)}
{\f1  }{\b\f1 auciri-}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 (so as to have or or use a required portion:) }{\b\f1 h\'f3ciri- }{\i\f1 -RIS, LT1:254, WJ:365-366, 368}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 CYCLE }{\b\f1 randa }{\f1 (age) }{\i\f1 -RAD}{\f1 
\par 
\par }{\b\f1\fs24   <D>}{\f1 
\par   DAERON }{\i\f1 see }{\f1 DAIRON
\par   DAGGER }{\b\f1 sicil }{\f1 (knife), }{\b\f1 naica}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -SIK, GL:37
\par   }{\f1 DAIRON }{\b\f1 Sairon}{\f1  -}{\i\f1 GL:29}{\f1  (called }{\i\f1 Daeron}{\f1  in the published }{\i\f1 Silmarillion}{\f1 )}{\i\f1 
\par   }{\f1 DALE }{\b\f1 nal}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 nall\'eb }{\f1 (dell); DALE-SPRITES }{\b\f1 tavar }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 tavarni}{\i\f1 )}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -LT1:261, LT1:267
\par   }{\f1 DAMP }{\b\f1 ringa }{\f1 (chilly, cold) }{\i\f1 -LT1:265}{\f1 
\par   DANCE }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 lilta- }{\i\f1 -LILT}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 DANGLE }{\b\f1 linga- }{\i\f1 -LING}{\f1 
\par   DARE }{\b\f1 verya- }{\f1 (cf. BOLD) }{\i\f1 -BER
\par   }{\f1 DARK }{\i\f1 (adj.) }{\b\f1 morna}{\f1  (gloomy, sombre, black), }{\b\f1 nulla}{\f1  (dusky, obscure), }{\b\f1 l\'f3na}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Note: a homophone means "island")}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 l\'far\'eba }{\f1 (overcast),}{\i\f1  }{\f1 DARK OR HIDDEN }{
\b\f1 tumna}{\f1  (low-lying, low, profound, deep) DARK}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 hui }{\f1 (fog, murk, night); DARK, DARKNESS }{\b\f1 morni\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 m\'f3r\'eb }{\f1 (blackness, night), }{\b\f1 mor}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 l\'fam\'eb }{\i\f1 
(Note: }{\b\i\f1 l\'fam\'eb}{\i\f1  also means "hour, time")}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 l\'f3m\'eb }{\f1 (night, twilight, gloom), }{\b\f1 huin\'eb }{\f1 (shadow, gloom); DARK ELVES }{\b\f1 Moriquendi}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Morimor }{\i\f1 (}{\b\i\f1 L\'f3m\'ebarni }{\i\f1 
in LT1:259 is hardly a valid word in LotR-style Quenya)}{\f1 ; DARK ONE }{\i\f1 (=Morgoth) }{\b\f1 morion}{\f1 ; DARK WEATHER }{\b\f1 l\'far\'eb}{\f1 ; DARK LOWERING CLOUD }{\b\f1 lumbo}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 lumbor }{\i\f1 is attested)}{\f1 
; DARK VALE }{\b\f1 tumbo }{\f1 (deep valley) }{\i\f1 -Letters:382, NDUL, DO3, LT1:259, LT1:271, LT1:253, MOR, LotR:488 cf. Letters:308, Silm:431, MC:222 cf. 215, WJ:361/Silm:388, Nam/RGEO:67, FS, LT1:259, 269
\par   }{\f1 DAUGHTER }{\b\f1 yend\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 yen}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 -iel }{\i\f1 (suffix, e.g. }{\b\i\f1 Uin\'e9niel }{\i\f1 "daughter of Uinen" [UT:182]; this suffix may obsolete the earlier [TLT] ending }{\b\i\f1 -wen}{\i\f1 
, mentioned in LT1:271). The stem YEL, from which }{\b\i\f1 -iel }{\i\f1 must be derived, was removed from Etym. However, the UT example just mentioned is from a later text, indicating that Tolkien restored }{\b\i\f1 -iel}{\i\f1 . Perhaps }{\b\i\f1 yeld
\'eb}{\i\f1  was restored as the independent word for "daughter" at the same time and is to be preferred to }{\b\i\f1 yend\'eb}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 yen}{\i\f1 . Distinguish -}{\b\i\f1 riel }{\i\f1 in }{\b\i\f1 Alt\'e1riel}{\i\f1 
 (Galadriel), which does not mean "daughter" and becomes -}{\b\i\f1 riell}{\i\f1 - before an ending. -Y\'d4, YEL, 182/469
\par   }{\f1 DAWN }{\b\f1 \'e1ra}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (obsoleting }{\b\i\f1 \'f3r\'eb }{\i\f1 in LT1:264; this word means "rising" or "heart" in LotR-style Quenya)}{\f1 , \'86}{\b\f1 amaur\'eba }{\f1 (early day) }{\i\f1 -AR}{\i\f1\fs12 1}{\i\f1  , MC:223
\par   }{\f1 DAY }{\b\f1 aur\'eb}{\f1  (sunlight; }{\i\f1 Etym gives }{\b\i\f1 ar\'eb}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 arya }{\i\f1 (= 12 hours)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 r\'e9 }{\i\f1 (= 24 hours, counted from sunset to sunset)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 sana}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
(= 24 hours, but this is "Qenya"))}{\f1 , DAYTIME }{\b\f1 ari\'eb}{\f1 , EARLY DAY \'86}{\b\f1 amaur\'eba}{\f1  (dawn), DAYLIGHT }{\i\f1 - LT1:254 gives }{\b\i\f1 calma}{\i\f1 , but this word means "lamp" in LotR. }{\f1 LAST DAY OF YEAR }{\b\f1 quantien}{
\f1 , DAYSPRING }{\b\f1 tuil\'eb }{\i\f1 -AR}{\i\f1\fs12 1}{\i\f1 , Silm:229/234/439, LotR:1141, LT1:250, MC:223, YEN
\par   }{\f1 DEAD }{\b\f1 firin }{\i\f1 (= dead by natural cause)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 qualin }{\i\f1 (related to }{\b\i\f1 qualm\'eb }{\i\f1 "agony, death" and probably has darker connotations than }{\b\i\f1 firin}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 vanwa }{\f1 
(departed, lost, past, gone, vanished, no longer to be had), }{\b\f1 hessa}{\f1  (withered). DEAD BODY }{\b\f1 loico }{\f1 (corpse) }{\i\f1 -KWAL, PHIR, MC:223, LT1:255, WJ:366}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 DEAR }{\b\f1 melda }{\f1 (beloved), }{\b\f1 melin}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 moina}{\f1  (familiar), #}{\b\f1 melya }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 Melyanna}{\i\f1  "dear gift", Melian's Quenya name)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 valda }{\f1 (worth, worthy).}{\i\f1 
 Cf. also the "suffix of endearment" }{\b\i\f1 -ya}{\i\f1  mentioned in UT:418: }{\b\i\f1 Anardilya }{\i\f1 *"dear Anardil" (UT:174).}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -MEL, MOY, Silm:434, GL:23}{\f1 
\par   DEATH }{\b\f1 qualm\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 unqual\'eb}{\f1  (agony), }{\b\f1 nuru }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 Nuru }{\f1 = Mandos), }{\b\f1 fair\'eb }{\f1 (natural death [as act]) }{\i\f1 (Note: }{\b\i\f1 fair\'eb }{\i\f1 
also means "radiance" and "phantom", and even [in LT1:250] "free"), }{\b\f1 urdu}{\i\f1  -KWAL/LT1:264, \'d1GUR, PHIR, LT2:342}{\f1 
\par   DECLIVITY }{\b\f1 pend\'eb }{\f1 (downslape, slope) }{\i\f1 -PEN}{\f1 
\par   DEEP }{\b\f1 tumna}{\f1  (low-lying, low, profound, dark or hidden), }{\b\f1 n\'fara}{\f1 ; DEEP VALLEY }{\b\f1 tumbo }{\f1 (dark vale); DEEP SHADOW }{\b\f1 huin\'eb}{\f1  (gloom) }{\i\f1 -N\'db, TUB, VT41:8}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 DEFORMED CREATURE }{\b\f1 ulundo }{\f1 (hideous creature, monster) }{\i\f1 -\'daLUG}{\f1 
\par   DELL}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 nal}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 nall\'eb }{\f1 (dale) }{\i\f1 -LT1:261}{\f1 
\par   DEMAND }{\b\f1 can}{\f1 - (so when used with things as object, in effect = }{\i\f1 ask for}{\f1 ; otherwise }{\i\f1 command}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 order}{\f1 ) -}{\i\f1 PM:361-362}{\f1  (where only a stem }{\i\f1 KAN}{\f1  is mentioned)
\par   DEMON }{\b\f1 rauko }{\i\f1 (pl. #}{\b\f1 raukar}{\f1 ,}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 isolated from }{\b\f1 Valaraukar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 "Balrogs". LT1:250 gives }{\b\i\f1 arauk\'eb}{\i\f1 ; WJ:415 has }{\b\i\f1 rauko }{\i\f1 and }{\b\i\f1 arauko}{\i\f1 
, defined as "a powerful, hostile, and terrible creature".) See also ORC. -RUK, Silm:436, WJ:415
\par   }{\f1 DENTAL SERIES }{\b\f1 tincot\'e9ma }{\f1 (}{\i\f1 t}{\f1 -series) }{\i\f1 -LotR:1154}{\b\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 DENY }{\b\f1 lala}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 -LA (Note: a homophone means "laugh", but the past tense forms may differ. See LAUGH.)
\par }{\f1   DEPART }{\b\f1 vanya- }{\f1 (pa.t. }{\b\f1 vann\'eb}{\f1 ). }{\b\i\f1 Lend\'eb }{\i\f1 pa.t. of }{\b\i\f1 lelya}{\i\f1 /}{\b\i\f1 linna }{\i\f1 "go" is also glossed as "departed". }{\f1 DEPARTED }{\i\f1 (adj) }{\b\f1 vanwa }{\f1 
(gone, vanished, lost, past, no longer to be had, dead) }{\i\f1 -WAN, LED, WJ:366, Nam}{\f1 
\par   DEPRIVE OF LIBERTY }{\b\f1 avalerya}{\f1 - (bind, make fast, restrain) }{\i\f1 -VT41:5, 6}{\f1 
\par   DEPRIVED #}{\b\f1 racina}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (only pl. }{\b\i\f1 racin\'eb}{\i\f1  is attested)}{\f1  (stripped); DEPRIVED OF }{\b\f1 \'fana}{\f1  (destitute, forlorn); DEPRIVED SIGN #}{\b\f1 racina tengw\'eb}{\f1  (only pl. }{\b\f1 racin\'eb tengwi}{\f1 
 is attested). Also translated "stripped sign", this was in early Elvish analysis of Quenya the term for a consonant with no following vowel; the vowel was held to have disappeared or been omitted. \-}{\i\f1 -VT39:16, 14}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 DESCENDANT }{\b\f1 indyo }{\f1 (grandchild) }{\i\f1 (}{\b\i\f1 Indyo }{\i\f1 looks like Vanyarin Quenya; the combination }{\b\i\f1 ndy }{\i\f1 became }{\b\i\f1 ny }{\i\f1 in Noldorin Quenya. The Noldor likely used the form }{\b\i\f1 *inyo}
{\i\f1 .) }{\f1 MALE DESCENDANT }{\b\f1 yondo }{\f1 (son) }{\i\f1 (In LT2:344, it is said that }{\b\i\f1 yondo }{\i\f1 usually meant "(great) grandson", but in LotR-style Quenya it simply means "son".) -\'d1GYO(N)}{\f1 
\par   DESERT }{\b\f1 erum\'eb }{\i\f1 (cf. }{\b\f1 Eruman }{\i\f1 a desert north-east of Valinor) -ERE
\par   }{\f1 DESERTED }{\b\f1 erda }{\f1 (solitary) }{\i\f1 -LT1:269
\par   }{\f1 DESIRE }{\i\f1 (vb)}{\f1  #}{\b\f1 mer}{\f1 -}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (cited in the form }{\b\f1 mer\'eb}{\f1 , evidently the 3rd person aorist; pa.t. given as }{\b\f1 mern\'eb}{\f1 )}{\i\f1  }{\f1 (want, wish);}{\i\f1  }{\f1 DESIRE }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 
\'edr\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 n\'e1ma}{\f1  (= "a desire" or "a judgement"), }{\b\f1 n\'e1mi\'eb}{\f1  (= "a (single) desire" or "a (single) judgement"), }{\b\f1 milm\'eb}{\f1  (greed). }{\i\f1 (Note: }{\b\i\f1 \'edr\'eb }{\i\f1 
also means "when". The stem YES yields a word }{\b\i\f1 yesta}{\f1  "desire"}{\i\f1 , but this clashes with the corrected/updated form of }{\b\i\f1 esta}{\b\f1  }{\f1 - }{\i\f1 see FIRST.) }{\f1  DESIREABLE }{\b\f1 \'edrima }{\f1 (loveable), DESIRER }{
\b\f1 Irmo }{\i\f1 (name of a Vala). }{\f1 DESIRING TO START }{\b\f1 m\'edna}{\f1  (eager to go), also verb DESIRE TO GO IN SOME DIRECTION }{\b\f1 m\'edna}{\f1 - (to wish to go to a place, make for it, have some end in view).}{\i\f1 
 -MER, ID, VT41:13, MIL-IK, YES, WJ:403, VT39:11
\par }{\f1   DESTINE }{\b\f1 martya-}{\f1 ; DESTINY }{\b\f1 maranw\'eb }{\i\f1 -MBARAT}{\f1 
\par   DESTITUTE }{\b\f1 \'fana}{\f1  (deprived of, forlorn); DESTITUTE OF }{\b\f1 \'fa}{\f1  (usually followed by genitive: }{\b\f1 \'fa calo}{\f1  *"destitute of light [}{\i\f1 cala}{\f1 ]") (without). }{\i\f1 -VT39:14
\par   }{\f1 DETERMINANT VOWEL }{\b\f1 sund\'f3ma }{\i\f1 (lit. *"base-vowel, root-vowel". Christopher Tolkien notes: "Very briefly indeed, the Quendian consonantal base or }{\f1 sundo }{\i\f1 was characterized by a 'determinant vowel' or }{\f1 sund\'f3ma}{
\i\f1 : thus the }{\f1 sundo }{\i\f1 KAT has a medial }{\f1 sund\'f3ma }{\i\f1 'A', and TALAT has the }{\f1 sund\'f3ma }{\i\f1 repeated. In derivative forms the }{\f1 sund\'f3ma }{\i\f1 might be placed before the first consonant, e.g. ATALAT.") -WJ:319}{
\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 DEVICE }{\b\f1 tanw\'eb }{\f1 (craft, thing made, construction); SKILLFUL [?DEVICE - }{\i\f1 Tolkien's handwriting was illegible}{\f1 ] }{\b\f1 curo}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 curu}{\f1 -) }{\i\f1 -TAN, VT41:10}{\f1 
\par   DEVISE }{\b\f1 auta- }{\f1 (originate, invent) }{\i\f1 -GAWA}{\f1 
\par   DEW }{\b\f1 ross\'eb}{\f1  (fine rain, spray), }{\b\f1 rin}{\f1 . DEWY }{\b\f1 n\'edt\'eb }{\f1 (moist) }{\i\f1 -ROS/Letters:282, LT1:265, NEI}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 DEXTEROUS }{\b\f1 formait\'eb }{\f1 (right-handed) }{\i\f1 -PHOR}{\f1 
\par   DIACRITIC }{\b\f1 tehta }{\f1 (mark [in writing], sign) }{\i\f1 (In LotR:1155, the word is applied to the supralinear vowel-marks of F\'ebanorian writing, and pl. }{\b\i\f1 tehtar}{\i\f1  is attested.) -TEK, LotR:1155}{\f1 
\par   DIALECT - }{\i\f1 Tolkien notes that the word }{\b\i\f1 lamb\'eb }{\i\f1 "tongue" was originally "nearer to our 'dialect' than to 'language', but later when the Eldar became aware of other tongues, not intelligible without study, }{\f1 lambe }{\i\f1 
naturally became applied to the separate languages of any people or region" (WJ:394). Thus, }{\b\i\f1 lamb\'eb }{\i\f1 can hardly be used for "dialect" in Exilic Quenya. Cf. also VT39:15, where }{\b\i\f1 lamb\'eb}{\i\f1 
 is said to mean "the language or dialect of a particular or people".
\par   }{\f1 DICTUM }{\b\f1 eques }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 equessi}{\i\f1 ) }{\f1 (proverbial dictum, quotation, saying)}{\i\f1  -WJ:392}{\f1 
\par   DIE }{\b\f1 fir- }{\f1 (fade) }{\i\f1 -MC:223
\par   }{\f1 DIPHTHONG  #}{\b\f1 samna }{\i\f1 (only pl }{\b\i\f1 samnar}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 is attested. Distinct in Tengwar spelling from }{\b\i\f1 samna}{\i\f1  "wooden post", that is spelt with initial }{\b\i\f1 s\'fal\'eb}{\i\f1  instead of }{\b\i\f1 silm\'eb
}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 , also }{\b\f1 ohlon}{\f1  (pl. }{\b\f1 ohloni}{\f1  is attested); the latter term was used of vocalic diphthongs and "consonantal diphthongs" (like }{\i\f1 mb}{\f1 ) alike.}{\i\f1  -SAM, VT39:9
\par   }{\f1 DIM TO SEE }{\b\f1 n\'e9ca }{\f1 (vague, faint) }{\i\f1 (Pl }{\b\i\f1 n\'e9c\'eb }{\i\f1 is attested) -MC:223, 222
\par   }{\f1 DIRE }{\b\f1 aica}{\f1  (fell, terrible, sharp) }{\i\f1 -PM:347
\par   }{\f1 DIRECTION }{\b\f1 ti\'eb }{\f1 (course, line, pathway, road); DESIRE TO GO IN SOME DIRECTION }{\b\f1 m\'edna}{\f1 - (to wish to go to a place, make for it, have some end in view).}{\i\f1  - TE3/RGEO:67, VT39:11}{\f1 
\par   DIRTY }{\b\f1 v\'e1ra }{\f1 (soiled) }{\i\f1 -WA3}{\f1 
\par   DISAPPEAR }{\b\f1 vanya- }{\f1 (pa.t. }{\b\f1 vann\'eb}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 Note: a homophone of }{\b\i\f1 vanya }{\i\f1 means "beautiful"}{\f1 )}{\i\f1  }{\f1 (go, depart) }{\i\f1 -WAN}{\f1 
\par   DISCOLOURED }{\b\f1 p\'far\'eba }{\f1 (smeared) }{\i\f1 -MC:223
\par   }{\f1 DISEMBODIED SPIRIT }{\i\f1 see }{\f1 SPIRIT 
\par   DISGUST - }{\i\f1 feel disgust at }{\b\f1 feuya- }{\i\f1 -PHEW
\par   }{\f1 DISH }{\b\f1 ven\'eb }{\f1 (small boat, vessel) }{\i\f1 -LT1:254}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 DISORDERED }{\b\f1 r\'facina }{\f1 (confused, shattered) }{\i\f1 -MC:223
\par   }{\f1 DIVIDE IN MIDDLE }{\b\f1 perya- }{\f1 (halve) }{\i\f1 (After }{\b\i\f1 perya}{\b\f1 -}{\i\f1 , a word }{\b\i\f1 perina}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 is mentioned; it is undefined but must be the corresponding past participle: *"divided in middle, halved".) -PER
}{\f1 
\par   DIVINE }{\b\f1 valaina }{\i\f1 (= "of or belonging to the Valar", probably not to be used with reference to the One who is above them)}{\f1 ; DIVINITY }{\b\f1 valass\'eb}{\i\f1  -BAL}{\f1 
\par   DO NOT }{\b\f1 uin}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 umin}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 ("I do not", 1st pers. aorist)}{\f1  (pa.t. }{\b\f1 \'fam\'eb}{\f1 )}{\i\f1  (also = "am not" - see BE); }{\f1 DO NOT! }{\i\f1 (imperative) }{\b\f1 v\'e1! }{\f1 (}{\i\f1 also = }{\f1 I will not);}
{\i\f1  }{\f1 DON'T }{\b\f1 \'e1va}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 av\'e1}{\f1 ; DON'T DO IT! }{\b\f1 \'e1va car\'eb!}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1 -UGU/UMU, WJ:371
\par   }{\f1 DOER }{\b\f1 tyaro }{\f1 (actor, agent)}{\i\f1  -KYAR}{\f1 
\par   DOG }{\b\f1 huo }{\i\f1 -KHUG}{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1   DOME }{\b\f1 telluma}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 tellumar }{\i\f1 is attested) }{\f1 (copula), }{\b\f1 coromindo }{\f1 (cupola) }{\i\f1 -Nam/WJ:399, KOR
\par   }{\f1 DON'T }{\b\f1 \'e1va}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 av\'e1}{\f1 ; DON'T DO IT! }{\b\f1 \'e1va car\'eb!}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -WJ:371}{\f1 
\par   DOOM }{\b\f1 manar}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 mand\'eb }{\f1 (final end, fate, fortune, final bliss); }{\b\f1 umbar- }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 umbart}{\f1 -) (fate) }{\i\f1 In the story of T\'farin Turambar, it seems that }{\b\i\f1 ambar }{\i\f1 means "doom": }{\b\i\f1 
Turambar }{\i\f1 is said to mean "Master of Doom", and Nienor even uses the word in the instrumental case: }{\b\i\f1 ambartanen}{\i\f1  "by doom". Similarly, LT2:348 gives }{\b\i\f1 ambar }{\i\f1 "Fate". But in Etym, }{\b\i\f1 ambar }{\i\f1 
means "earth", and LotR Appendix E confirms that "fate" is }{\b\i\f1 umbar}{\i\f1 . }{\f1 DOOM RING }{\b\f1 M\'e1hanaxar }{\i\f1 (a foreign word in Quenya, adopted and adapted from Valarin.) -MAN/MANAD, MBARAT, Silm:261, 269, LotR:1157, WJ:399
\par   }{\f1 DORIATH }{\b\f1 #Lestan\'f3r\'eb }{\i\f1 (only gen.}{\f1  }{\b\f1 Lestan\'f3r\'ebo }{\i\f1 is attested) -WJ:369
\par   }{\f1 DORL\'d3MIN }{\b\f1 L\'f3min\'f3r\'eb }{\i\f1 -WJ:145}{\f1 
\par   DOT }{\b\f1 pica }{\f1 (small spot), }{\b\f1 tix\'eb }{\f1 (tiny mark, point), }{\b\f1 amatix\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 nuntix\'eb }{\f1 (points over and under the line of writing respectively) }{\i\f1 -PIK, TIK}{\f1 
\par   DOUBLE }{\i\f1 (prob. adj) }{\b\f1 atwa}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tanta}{\f1 ; DOUBLE }{\i\f1 (vb)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 tatya- }{\f1 (repeat). }{\i\f1 (Note: }{\b\i\f1 tatya }{\i\f1 also means "second".) -AT(AT), TATA
\par }{\f1   DOUG }{\b\f1 max\'eb }{\i\f1 -MASAG}{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1   DOVE }{\b\f1 cu}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 cua }{\i\f1 (perhaps m. and f. respectively) -K\'db}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 DOWN }{\b\f1 undu }{\f1 (under, beneath); DOWN-FALL }{\b\f1 atalant\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 atalanti\'eb }{\f1 (collapse); DOWN-FALLEN }{\b\f1 atalant\'eba}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 (pl }{\b\i\f1 atalanti\'eb }{\i\f1 is attested)}{\f1  (ruinous); DOWN BELOW }{
\i\f1 (adv.) }{\b\f1 n\'fan }{\f1 (underneath);}{\i\f1  }{\f1 "DOWN-LICK" }{\i\f1 (i.e., cover completely) }{\f1  #}{\b\f1 undulav- }{\i\f1 (only pa.t. }{\b\i\f1 undul\'e1v\'eb }{\i\f1 is attested) -UNU, N\'db, MC:222, 223/Letters:347, RGEO:67/Nam}{\f1 

\par   DOWNSLOPE }{\b\f1 pend\'eb }{\f1 (slope, declivity) }{\i\f1 -PEN/P\'c9NED}{\f1 
\par   DRAGON }{\b\f1 l\'f3k\'eb}{\f1  (serpent, snake; }{\i\f1 "so do the Eldar name the worms of Melko[r]"}{\f1 , LT2:85), }{\b\f1 angul\'f3k\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 fenum\'eb}{\f1 ; WINGED DRAGON }{\b\f1 r\'e1mal\'f3k\'eb}{\f1 ; FIRE-DRAGON }{\b\f1 urul\'f3k\'eb
}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 Urul\'f3ki }{\i\f1 is attested in Silm:138, there capitalized)}{\f1 ; SPARK-DRAGON }{\b\f1 f\'ebal\'f3k\'eb}{\f1 ; FISH-DRAGON }{\b\f1 lingwil\'f3k\'eb}{\f1  (sea-serpent)}{\i\f1  -LOK; cf. ANGWA, LT2:341, RAM, UR, PHAY, LIW

\par   }{\f1 DRAKE }{\i\f1 (LT2:340) see }{\f1 DRAGON 
\par  }{\b\f1  }{\f1 DRAUGHT }{\b\f1 #yulda}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (only pl. }{\b\i\f1 yuldar }{\i\f1 is attested), }{\b\f1 suhto }{\i\f1 -Nam, SUK
\par   }{\f1 DRAW }{\b\f1 tucin}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 ("I draw", 1st pers. aorist)}{\f1 ; DRAW WATER }{\b\f1 calpa- }{\f1 (bale out, scoop out); DRAWING }{\b\f1 #halm\'eb }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 Turuhalm\'eb }{\i\f1 "Log-drawing")}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
-KALPA, LotR:270
\par   }{\f1 DREAD }{\b\f1 aista- }{\i\f1 -GAYAS
\par   }{\f1 DREAM }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 olor}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ol\'f3r\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 lor}{\f1 ; DREAMY }{\b\f1 olosta}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ol\'f3r\'eba }{\i\f1 -LOS, LT1:259, LotR:488 cf. Letters:308, UT:396
\par   }{\f1 DRINK }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 sucin}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 ("I drink", 1st pers. aorist)}{\f1 ; DRINK OF THE VALAR }{\b\f1 limp\'eb }{\i\f1 (so glossed under LIP; "drink of the fairies" in LT1:258) or }{\b\f1 m\'edruv\'f3r\'eb }{\i\f1 (LT1:261)}{\f1 
; DRINKING }{\b\f1 yulm\'eb }{\f1 (carousal) }{\i\f1 (Note: a homophone means "smouldering heat")}{\f1 ; DRINKING-VESSEL }{\b\f1 yulma }{\f1 (cup), }{\b\f1 sungwa}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 -SUK, WJ:416/Nam
\par   }{\f1 DRIP }{\b\f1 lipte- }{\i\f1 -LT1:258
\par   }{\f1 DROP }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 limba}{\f1 ; LITTLE DROP }{\b\f1 lipt\'eb }{\i\f1 -LIB, LT1:258
\par   }{\f1 DROWNED }{\b\f1 quorin }{\f1 (choked) }{\i\f1 -LT1:264
\par   }{\f1 DROWSY }{\b\f1 lorda }{\f1 (slumbrous) }{\i\f1 -LT1:259
\par   }{\f1 DR\'db }{\b\f1 r\'fa }{\f1 (wose), DR\'daADAN }{\b\f1 R\'faatan }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 R\'faatani }{\i\f1 is given but seems perfectly regular) -UT:385
\par   }{\f1 DRY }{\i\f1 (prob. adj not vb) }{\b\f1 parca }{\i\f1 -P\'c1RAK
\par   }{\f1 DRYAD }{\b\f1 tavaro}{\f1 ,}{\b\f1  tavaron }{\i\f1 (m.)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tavaril }{\i\f1 (f.)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 nandin }{\i\f1 (further defined as "fay of the country") -T\'c1WAR, LT1:261
\par   }{\f1 DUILIN }{\b\f1 Tulindo}{\f1 ; HOUSE OF DUILIN }{\b\f1 Noss\'eb Tuilinda }{\i\f1 (}{\b\i\f1 Tuilinda }{\i\f1 must be an adjectival form of }{\b\i\f1 Tuilindo}{\i\f1 ) -LT2:338
\par   }{\f1 D\'daNEDAIN }{\b\f1 N\'fanatani }{\i\f1 -WJ:386
\par   }{\f1 DUSK }{\b\f1 hist\'eb }{\i\f1 (also }{\b\i\f1 h\'eds\'eb}{\i\f1 , but this clashes with a word meaning "fog, mist")}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 l\'f3m\'eb }{\f1 (night, gloom, darkness, twilight)}{\i\f1  -LT1:255
\par   }{\f1 DUSKY }{\b\f1 nulla }{\f1 (dark, obscure) }{\i\f1 -NDUL }{\f1 
\par   DUST }{\b\f1 asto -}{\i\f1 \'c1S-AT
\par   }{\f1 DWARF }{\b\f1 Nauco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 Naucor }{\i\f1 is attested; LT1:261 gives }{\b\i\f1 nauca }{\i\f1 instead of }{\b\i\f1 nauco}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Norno}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (}{\b\i\f1 Naucali\'eb}{\i\f1 ,}{\b\i\f1  Nornali\'eb }{
\i\f1 = the whole people of the Dwarves)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 Casar }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 Casari}{\i\f1  or }{\b\i\f1 Cas\'e1ri}{\i\f1 ; partitive plural }{\b\i\f1 Casalli}{\i\f1 ; the whole people of the Dwarves being called }{\b\i\f1 Casalli\'eb}{\i\f1 
. According to WJ, }{\b\i\f1 Casar}{\i\f1  - Quenyaized form of Dwarvish }{\b\i\f1 Khaz\'e2d}{\i\f1  - "was the word most commonly used in Quenya for the Dwarves". }{\b\i\f1 Nauco }{\i\f1 "stunted one" and }{\b\i\f1 norno }{\i\f1 "thrawn one" are les
s polite words for "dwarf"; yet }{\b\i\f1 norno }{\i\f1 is stated to be "the more friendly term". But the Dwarves themselves would definitely prefer }{\b\i\f1 Casar}{\i\f1 .) }{\f1 PETTY-DWARVES }{\b\f1 Picinaucor}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Pitya-naucor }{\i\f1 
(lit. *"small dwarves")}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Attalyar }{\i\f1 (lit. "Bipeds").}{\f1  DWARROWVAULT }{\b\f1 Casarrondo }{\f1 (Khazad-d\'fbm) }{\i\f1 -NAUK, WJ:388, 389
\par   }{\f1 DWELLER }{\b\f1 mardo}{\f1 , DWELLING }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 mar }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 mas-}{\f1 ) (home), DWELLING }{\i\f1 (adj)}{\f1  #}{\b\f1 farn\'eb }{\i\f1 (a pl form? Sg }{\b\i\f1 farna}{\i\f1 ? Only attested in the compound }{\b\i\f1 orofarn\'eb 
}{\i\f1 "mountain-dwelling". Note: }{\b\i\f1 farn\'eb }{\i\f1 is also the pa.t. of }{\b\i\f1 farya- }{\i\f1 "suffice")}{\f1 ; DWELLING-PLACE }{\b\f1 n\'f3r\'eb }{\f1 
(land, region where certain people live, nation, native land, family); DWELLING UNDERGROUND }{\b\f1 hr\'f3ta}{\f1  (artificial cave, rockhewn hall) }{\i\f1 -LT1:251, LotR:505 cf. Letters:224, NDOR, PM:365
\par   }{\f1 DWINDLE }{\b\f1 p\'edca }{\i\f1 (part. }{\b\i\f1 p\'edcala }{\i\f1 is attested) }{\f1 (lessen) }{\i\f1 -MC:223, 222                 
\par 
\par }{\b\f1\fs24   <E>}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 EACH }{\b\f1 ilya}{\f1  (every, all of a particular group of things), }{\b\f1 m\'e1ca}{\f1  (a very early "Qenya" word of doubtful authority) }{\i\f1 -VT39:20, GL:41}{\f1 
\par   EAGER TO GO }{\b\f1 m\'edna}{\f1 - (desiring to start) }{\i\f1 -VT39:11}{\f1 
\par   EAGLE }{\b\f1 soron}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 sorn\'eb }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\f1 so}{\b\i\f1 rni}{\i\f1 ) (So in Etym; Letters:427 has }{\b\i\f1 sorno}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 thorno}{\i\f1 , LT1:266 also has }{\b\i\f1 sor}{\i\f1 . }{
\b\i\f1 Soron}{\i\f1 /}{\b\i\f1 sorno  }{\i\f1 obsoletes }{\b\i\f1 ea}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 earen}{\i\f1  in LT1:251 and LT2:338 }{\f1 - }{\i\f1 besides, }{\b\i\f1 \'eba }{\i\f1 means "is, exists" in Tolkien's later Quenya.) }{\f1 KING OF EAGLES }{\b\f1 
Sorontur}{\f1 , "EAGLE-HORN" }{\i\f1 (a great height in N\'famenor)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 Sorontil }{\i\f1 -THOR, Letters:427, UT:465
\par   }{\f1 EARLY }{\b\f1 arinya}{\f1 ; EARLY DAY \'86}{\b\f1 amaur\'eba }{\f1 (dawn); EARLY MORN }{\b\f1 tuil\'eb }{\f1 (dayspring, spring-time) }{\i\f1 -AR}{\i\f1\fs16 1}{\i\f1 , MC:223, TUY       
\par   }{\f1 EARTH }{\b\f1 cemen}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 kemen }{\f1 (soil). }{\i\f1 (Note: at the time Tolkien wrote Etym, he thought of }{\b\i\f1 cemen }{\i\f1 as the genitive of }{\b\i\f1 c\'e9n}{\i\f1 , but later }{\b\i\f1 cemen }{\i\f1 evidently became 
the nominative form, as it had been in earlier writings [LT1:257]. In Silm:433, it is said that }{\b\i\f1 cemen }{\i\f1 [}{\b\i\f1 kemen}{\i\f1 ] refers to "the Earth as a flat floor beneath }{\b\i\f1 menel}{\i\f1 , the heavens". LT1:257 also has }{
\b\i\f1 cemi }{\i\f1 "earth, soil, land" and }{\b\i\f1 K\'e9mi }{\i\f1 "Mother Earth".)}{\f1  EARTH-QUEEN }{\b\f1 Kement\'e1ri }{\i\f1 (Yavanna's title)}{\f1 ; EARTHEN, OF EARTH }{\b\f1 cemina}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (LT2:343 gives }{\b\i\f1 indi }{\i\f1 
"earthdwellers", another word for "men", but this is hardly a valid word in LotR-style Quenya.) }{\f1 EARTH }{\i\f1 (= world)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 Ambar }{\f1 (world) }{\i\f1 (Tolkien equated }{\b\i\f1 Ambar}{\i\f1  with }{\f1 Oikoumene}{\i\f1 , a Greek word den
oting "world" considered as "the inhabited world of Men". But }{\b\i\f1 ambar }{\i\f1 also seems to mean "doom", q.v. MR:337 (cf. WJ:419) has }{\b\i\f1 Imbar }{\i\f1 instead of }{\b\i\f1 Ambar}{\i\f1 
; the literal meaning of both words is said to be "habitation") -KEM/Silm:433/LT1:257, MBAR cf. Letters:283 or SD:409            
\par   }{\f1 EAST }{\b\f1 r\'f3men}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (allative }{\b\i\f1 R\'f3menna}{\i\f1  and ablative}{\b\i\f1  R\'f3mello}{\i\f1  in Nam\'e1ri\'eb is capitalized), }{\b\f1 r\'f3na}{\f1 ; EASTERN }{\b\f1 r\'f3menya }{\i\f1 (}{\b\i\f1 Entar}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 
Entardar }{\i\f1 "Outer Lands, Middle-earth" is also glossed as "East" once, as opposed to the Blessed Realm of the West.) The words }{\b\i\f1 \'f3r\'eb }{\i\f1 "dawn, Sunrise, East" and its corresponding adjective }{\b\i\f1 \'f3r\'eba }{\i\f1 
(LT1:264) are probably not valid words in LotR-style Quenya; see DAWN.}{\f1  }{\i\f1 Neither can }{\b\i\f1 Ostar }{\i\f1 "East" be a valid word; see GATE. }{\f1 EAST-VICTOR }{\b\f1 R\'f3mendacil }{\i\f1 (one of the Kings of Gondor) }{\f1 EAST-LANDS }{
\b\f1 Orrostar }{\i\f1 (a region in N\'famenor) -R\'d4/LotR:1157, UT:463, Nam, EN, LotR:1075, 1081, UT:165, 459
\par   }{\f1 EAT }{\b\f1 mat-}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 mata}{\f1 - (pa.t. }{\b\f1 mant\'eb}{\f1  is given)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -MAT, VT39:7}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 ECHO }{\b\f1 l\'e1ma }{\f1 (ringing sound }{\i\f1 - so in Etym, but see SOUND}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 nall\'e1ma}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (In Etym, the second }{\b\i\f1 a }{\i\f1 of the latter word has an undefined diacritic here represented by \'b4.) }{\f1 
 ECHOING }{\b\f1 l\'e1mina}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -LAM
\par   }{\f1 EDDY }{\b\f1 hwinya- }{\f1 (swirl, gyrate); }{\b\f1 hwind\'eb }{\f1 (whirlpool) }{\i\f1 -SWIN
\par   }{\f1 EDGE }{\b\f1 r\'e9na}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 r\'edma }{\i\f1 -REG, R\'ce
\par   }{\f1 EGLATH }{\i\f1 (or EGLAIN, EGLADHRIM) }{\b\f1 Heceldi }{\i\f1 (the "Forsaken" Elves, especially the Eldar left in Beleriand; sg }{\b\i\f1 Hecel }{\i\f1 is given. MR:170 has }{\b\i\f1 Ecelli}{\i\f1 .) -WJ:365 cf. Silm:68
\par   }{\f1 EIGHT }{\b\f1 tolto }{\i\f1 -TOL}{\i\f1\fs12 1}{\i\f1 -OTH/OT
\par   }{\f1 ELBOW }{\b\f1 \'f3lem\'eb }{\i\f1 -LT1:258
\par   }{\f1 ELEPHANT }{\b\f1 andamunda }{\i\f1 -MBUD
\par   }{\f1 ELEVEN }{\b\f1 minqu\'eb }{\i\f1 -MINIK-W-, LT1:260
\par   }{\f1 ELF }{\b\f1 quend\'eb }{\i\f1 (generic, seldom used in the sg; pl }{\b\i\f1 Quendi}{\i\f1  is the usual form; there are gender-specific forms }{\b\i\f1 quendu }{\i\f1 m. and }{\b\i\f1 quendi }{\i\f1 f., but they seem to be rare; pl. }{\b\i\f1 
quendur}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 quendir }{\i\f1 is attested)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Elda }{\i\f1 (originally generic, but later [MET] used of Elves of the Three Kindreds [Noldor, Vanyar, Teleri] only. That was at least the proper usage: }{\b\i\f1 Elda }{\i\f1 was th
e normal word for "elf" in Valinor, as all Elves there were Eldar. An archaic variant of }{\b\i\f1 Elda }{\i\f1 was }{\b\i\f1 Eldo}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1  ELVES OF AMAN }{\b\f1 Amanyar }{\i\f1 (sg #}{\b\i\f1 Amanya}{\i\f1 ), }{\f1 
ELVES WHO REFUSED TO JOIN IN THE WESTWARD MARCH }{\i\f1 (from Cuivi\'e9nen) }{\b\f1 Avari }{\i\f1 (sg }{\b\i\f1 Avar}{\i\f1  in WJ:371; }{\b\i\f1 Avar }{\i\f1 or }{\b\i\f1 Avaro }{\i\f1 in Etym)}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 also called }{\b\i\f1 Avamanyar }{\i\f1 
"those who did not go to Aman, because they would not" (distinguish }{\b\i\f1 \'damanyar}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 \'daamanyar}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 Alamanyar }{\i\f1 "those who did not in the event reach Aman", though they did join in the march from Cuivi\'e9
nen; these are also called }{\b\i\f1 Heceldi}{\i\f1  or }{\b\i\f1 Ecelli}{\i\f1 , see EGLATH). }{\f1 See also DARK ELVES, GREEN-ELVES, GREY-ELVES, HIGH-ELVES, LIGHT-ELVES, SEA-ELVES, LITTLE ELF. Cf. also}{\i\f1  }{\f1 ELVENHOME }{\b\f1 Eldamar}{\f1 , }{
\b\f1 Elend\'eb}{\f1 . ELF-PEOPLE }{\b\f1 Eldali\'eb}{\f1 , ELVISH }{\b\f1 Eldarinwa}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 (adj only; "Elvish" meaning Elvish language is simply }{\b\i\f1 Eldarin}{\i\f1 . Properly, thes
e words for "Elvish" apply to the Tree Kindreds only, not to all the Quendi.) }{\b\f1 Quenderin }{\i\f1 ("Elvish" referring to all the Quendi, "Quendian"; this remained a learned word)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
-WJ:361/KWEN(ED), MR:229 ELED, Silm:424, AB/WJ:371/Silm:65/MR:163, WJ:363, Silm:23/392, MR:415, WJ:407
\par  }{\f1 ELF-FRIEND }{\b\f1 Elendil}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (actually meaning *"star-friend". Tolkien notes: "It is not surprising that the Edain...found it difficult to discern whether words and names containing the element }{\f1 el }{\i\f1 
referred to the stars or to the Elves. This is seen in the name }{\f1 Elendil}{\i\f1 
, which was meant to bear the sense "Elf-friend". Properly in Quenya it meant 'a lover or student of the stars'... 'Elf-friend' would have been more correctly represented by }{\f1 Quen(den)dil }{\i\f1 or }{\f1 Eldandil}{\i\f1 .") -WJ:410  
\par  }{\f1 ELF-LOVER #}{\b\f1 Eldameldo }{\i\f1 (pl }{\b\i\f1 Eldameldor }{\i\f1 in WJ:417)
\par  }{\f1 ELF-STONE }{\b\f1 Elessar }{\i\f1 (Aragorn's royal name, prob. *}{\b\i\f1 Elessard-}{\i\f1 , cf. STONE. The literal meaning is *Star-stone, not Elf-stone - but the Edain confused }{\b\i\f1 elen }{\i\f1 "star" and }{\b\i\f1 elda }{\i\f1 "elf". Cf. }
{\b\i\f1 Elendil}{\i\f1 ; see ELF-FRIEND above.) -LotR:395, 897
\par   }{\f1 ELM-TREE }{\b\f1 alalm\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 lalm\'eb}{\f1 ; LAND OF ELMS }{\b\f1 Alalmin\'f3r\'eb }{\f1 (Warwickshire) }{\i\f1 -\'c1LAM/LT1:249, L\'c1LAM}{\f1 
\par   ELONGATED }{\b\f1 taina}{\f1  (stretched, elongated, extended) }{\i\f1 -VT39:7
\par   }{\f1 EMBER }{\b\f1 y\'fala }{\f1 (smouldering wood) }{\i\f1 -YUL
\par   }{\f1 EMINENT MAN }{\b\f1 ar\'e1to }{\f1 (champion) }{\i\f1 -Silm:428
\par   }{\f1 EMIT LIGHT }{\b\f1 faina- }{\i\f1 -PHAY}{\f1 
\par   EMOTION }{\b\f1 felm\'eb}{\f1  (impulse) }{\i\f1 -VT41:19
\par }{\f1   EMPTY }{\b\f1 lusta}{\f1  (void), }{\b\f1 cumna }{\i\f1 -LUS, KUM
\par   }{\f1 ENCHANT }{\b\f1 luhta-}{\f1 ; ENCHANTMENT }{\b\f1 l\'fac\'eb }{\i\f1 -LUK}{\b\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 ENCLOSURE }{\b\f1 panda}{\f1 ; CIRCULAR ENCLOSURE }{\b\f1 corin}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -PAD, KOR
\par   }{\f1 END}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 metta}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ment\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tyel}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tyeld\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 telu}{\f1 ; THE ENDING OF THE WORLD }{\b\f1 Ambar-metta}{\f1 ; END }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 tele- }{\i\f1 (intr
ansitive) }{\f1 (finish }{\i\f1 - so in WJ:411 - LT1:267 gives }{\b\i\f1 telu}{\i\f1 -}{\f1 ),}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 tyel- }{\f1 (cease), PUT AN END TO }{\b\f1 metya-}{\f1 , HAVE SOME END IN VIEW }{\b\f1 m\'edna}{\f1 
- (desire to go in some direction, wish to go to a place, make for it)}{\i\f1  -LotR:1003, MET, LT1:267, WJ:411, KYEL, VT39:11
\par   }{\f1 ENDLESS PERIOD }{\b\f1 oio }{\i\f1 -UT:317
\par   }{\f1 ENDURANCE }{\b\f1 voronwi\'eb }{\f1 (lasting quality); ENDURING }{\b\f1 voronwa }{\f1 (long-lasting) }{\i\f1 -BOR\'d3N
\par   }{\f1 ENEMY }{\b\f1 cotumo }{\i\f1 -KOT
\par   }{\f1 ENGLAND - }{\i\f1 see FA\'cbRY.
\par   }{\f1 ENOUGH }{\b\f1 far\'eba }{\f1 (sufficient) }{\i\f1 -PHAR
\par   }{\f1 ENQUIRY }{\b\f1 centa }{\i\f1 (as in }{\b\i\f1 Essecenta Eldarinwa}{\i\f1 , probably meaning *"Enquiry into Eldarin Names", as Tolkien described the work as an "Enquiry into the origins of Elvish names for Elves"; cf. also }{\b\i\f1 Osanwe-centa}{
\i\f1 , translated "enquiry into the communication of thought". Another possible translation of }{\b\i\f1 centa }{\i\f1 may be *"essay".) -MR:415, VT39:23}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 ENTRANCE }{\i\f1 (to harbour) }{\b\f1 lond\'eb }{\f1 (road [in sea], also translated "haven", q.v.)
\par   ENVELOPE }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 vaiya, vaia }{\i\f1 (both with alternative, possibly older [MET] forms in }{\b\i\f1 w}{\b\f1 -}{\i\f1 ). -WAY
\par   }{\f1 EXPIRE }{\b\f1 f\'edr\'eb- }{\i\f1 (perf. }{\b\i\f1 f\'edri\'eb }{\i\f1 ["has breathed forth"] is attested; }{\b\i\f1 *if\'edri\'eb }{\i\f1 may be the more usual form) -MR:250}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 
\par   }{\f1 ERRANT }{\b\f1 r\'e1nen }{\i\f1 -RAN
\par   }{\f1 ESCAPE }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 usin }{\i\f1 (glossed "he escapes" in LT:251, but in LotR-style Quenya it would have to mean, if anything, *"I escape" - 1st pers. aorist); }{\f1 ESCAPE }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 usw\'eb }{\f1 (issue) }{\i\f1 
-LT1:251
\par  }{\f1 *ESSAY }{\i\f1 see *ENQUIRY.
\par   }{\f1 ESTABLISH }{\b\f1 tulca- }{\f1 (fix, set up. }{\i\f1 Note: there is a homophone meaning "firm, steadfast, strong, immoveable".}{\f1 )}{\i\f1  -LT1:270 cf. TULUK
\par   }{\f1 ETERNAL }{\b\f1 oira }{\i\f1 -OY
\par   }{\f1 EVENING }{\b\f1 and\'fan\'eb }{\f1 (sunset, west), }{\b\f1 siny\'eb }{\i\f1 -MC:222, THIN
\par   }{\f1 EVER }{\b\f1 oi}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 voro}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 vor}{\f1  (continually) }{\i\f1 (pref. #}{\b\f1 oio-}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 vor-}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 voro-}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 , EVERWHITE, EVER-SNOW-WHITE }{\b\f1 Oioloss\'eb }{\i\f1 (a name for Taniquetil; gen }{
\b\i\f1 Oioloss\'ebo }{\i\f1 is attested in Nam, where it has an ablatival meaning); }{\f1 EVERSUMMER }{\b\f1 Oiolair\'eb}{\f1 , EVERLASTING }{\b\f1 oia}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 vorima}{\f1 ; EVERLASTING [?AGE] }{\i\f1 (Tolkien's handwriting was illegible) }{\b\f1 
oir\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 oial\'eb}{\f1 ;}{\i\f1  }{\f1 FOR EVER, EVERLASTINGLY }{\b\f1 oial\'eb }{\i\f1 (evidently the noun just mentioned used as an adverb)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tennoio }{\i\f1 -OY, UT:458, BOR, LT1:250/273, Nam/RGEO:67, Silm:429, UT:317}{\f1 

\par   EVERY }{\b\f1 ilya}{\f1  (each, all of a particular group of things), }{\b\f1 m\'e1ca}{\f1  (a very early "Qenya" word of doubtful authority) }{\i\f1 -VT39:20}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 GL:41
\par   }{\f1 EVERYBODY }{\b\f1 ilquen}{\f1 ; EVERYTHING }{\b\f1 ilu}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (all, the whole; of the universe also including God and all souls and spirits, which are not properly included in the term }{\b\i\f1 E\'e4}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ilqua }{\i\f1 
-WJ:372, VT39:20,  IL
\par   }{\f1 EVIL }{\b\f1 \'fam\'eba}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 #ulca }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 henulca}{\i\f1 , see below);}{\f1  EVILEYED }{\b\f1 henulca}{\f1 ; EVIL-SMELLING }{\b\f1 saura }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (foul, putrid) - }{\i\f1 
in compounds #}{\b\i\f1 sauri-}{\i\f1 , see FOUL.}{\f1  FREE FROM EVIL }{\b\f1 aman }{\i\f1 (see BLESSED). -SD:68, 72, UGU, THUS, WJ:399
\par   }{\f1 EXALTED ONES}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 Aratar }{\i\f1 (pl; sg #}{\b\i\f1 Arata}{\i\f1 ). The Aratar are the mightiest of the Valar: Manw\'eb, Varda, Ulmo, Yavanna, Aul\'eb, Mandos, Nienna, and Orom\'eb. }{\b\i\f1 Aratar }{\i\f1 
is also rendered "High Ones, The Supreme" -Silm 32/381, WJ:402 
\par   }{\f1 EXCEPT }{\b\f1 hequa }{\f1 (leaving aside, not counting, excluding) }{\i\f1 -WJ:364, 365
\par   }{\f1 EXCLUDE}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 hehta- }{\i\f1 (pa.t. }{\b\i\f1 hehtan\'eb }{\i\f1 is given but seems perfectly regular) }{\f1 (put aside, leave out,  abandon, forsake); EXCLUDING }{\b\f1 hequa }{\f1 (leaving aside, not counting, except) }{\i\f1 
-WJ:364, 365}{\f1 
\par   EXIST }{\b\f1 \'eba}{\f1  (is) }{\i\f1 -VT39:6, 7
\par   }{\f1 EXPAND }{\b\f1 palu-}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 palya- }{\f1 (spread, extend, open wide); EXPANSIVE }{\b\f1 palla }{\f1 (wide) }{\i\f1 -PAL
\par   }{\f1 EXPIRE }{\b\f1 f\'edr\'eb- }{\i\f1 (originally used of "one sighing or releasing a deep breath", but also used of M\'edriel when she "breathed forth" and died; later used of the death of mortals. Perf. }{\b\i\f1 f\'edri\'eb }{\i\f1 is attested; *}
{\b\i\f1 if\'edri\'eb }{\i\f1 with prefix sund\'f3ma is probably also a possible form.) -MR:250
\par   }{\f1 EXTEND }{\b\f1 palu-}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 palya- }{\f1 (spread, expand, open wide); EXTENDED }{\b\f1 taina }{\f1 (lengthened, stretched, elongated); EXTENSION }{\b\f1 tail\'eb }{\f1 (lengthening) }{\i\f1 -PAL, TAY
\par   }{\f1 EYE }{\b\f1 hen }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 hend-}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (normal pl. }{\b\i\f1 hendi }{\i\f1 as well as the dual form #}{\b\i\f1 hendu }{\i\f1 are attested [isolated from }{\b\i\f1 hendumaica}{\i\f1 , WJ:337]; #}{\b\i\f1 hendu}{\i\f1 
 would be used of a natural pair of eyes). }{\f1 SHARP-EYE }{\b\f1 hendumaica}{\f1 , EYES OF HEARTSEASE }{\i\f1 (a name of the pansy) }{\b\f1 Helinyetill\'eb }{\i\f1 -KHEN-D-E, WJ:337, LT1:262
\par   }{\f1 EYRIE }{\b\f1 sornion}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (lit. gen.pl "of eagles"?). -LT1:266.}{\f1  (}{\i\f1 LT1:251 gives }{\b\i\f1 \'ebaren}{\i\f1 , but this is hardly a valid word in LotR-style Quenya [see}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 EAGLE])

\par }{\b\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1\fs24   <F>}{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1   FACE }{\b\f1 anta}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -ANA}{\f1 
\par   FADE }{\b\f1 sinta- }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (pa.t. }{\b\i\f1 sintan\'eb }{\i\f1 is given, though it seems perfectly regular)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 fir- }{\f1 (die), }{\b\f1 fif\'edru- }{\i\f1 (}{\f1 "slowly fade away", }{\i\f1 
frequentative form of }{\b\i\f1 fir-}{\i\f1 ; the participal form }{\b\i\f1 fif\'edrula }{\i\f1 is attested}{\f1 ); FADING }{\b\f1 quell\'eb }{\f1 (}{\i\f1 In the Calendar of Imladris, }{\b\i\f1 quell\'eb }{\i\f1 
was a precisely defined period of 54 days in late autumn. Also called }{\b\i\f1 lasselanta}{\i\f1 ; see AUTUMN.) }{\f1  }{\i\f1 -THIN, MC:222/223, LotR:1141
\par   }{\f1 FA\'cbRY }{\b\f1 Inwilis}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Inwin\'f3r\'eb }{\i\f1 (another gloss, "England", was struck out) -LT1:256
\par   }{\f1 FAINT }{\b\f1 n\'e9ca }{\f1 (vague, dim to see) }{\i\f1 -MC:222/223
\par   }{\f1 FAIR }{\b\f1 vanima}{\f1  (beautiful, proper, right), }{\b\f1 van\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 melima}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 linda }{\f1 (beautiful); FAIR FOLK }{\b\f1 Vanimo }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 Vanimor }{\i\f1 
is given but seems perfectly regular; the word is said to apply to the "children of the Valar").}{\f1  FAIR-MINDED }{\b\f1 faila }{\f1 (generous, just), NOT FAIR }{\b\f1 \'favanima}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (ugly)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
-BAN/VT39:14, LT1:272, MEL, SLIN, PM:352, VT39:14
\par   }{\f1 FAITHFUL }{\b\f1 voronda}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 v\'f3rima}{\f1  (steadfast) }{\i\f1 -UT:317, LT1:250
\par   }{\f1 FALL }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 lanta- }{\i\f1 (pres. pl. }{\b\i\f1 lantar}{\i\f1 , pl. past }{\b\i\f1 lantaner }{\i\f1 and part. }{\b\i\f1 #lantala }{\i\f1 are attested)}{\f1 ; FALL }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 lanta }{\i\f1 or #}{\b\f1 lant\'eb}{\f1 . }{
\i\f1 (The first of these words occurs in the compound }{\b\i\f1 lasselanta }{\i\f1 "leaf-fall, Autumn", while #}{\b\i\f1 lant\'eb }{\i\f1 is isolated from }{\b\i\f1 Noldolant\'eb }{\i\f1 "the Fall of the Noldor". From these examples it appears that a }{
\b\i\f1 lanta }{\i\f1 is a physical fall, while a }{\b\i\f1 lant\'eb }{\i\f1 is a moral fall. Perhaps the latter word can also be applied to a military defeat, as in "the fall of Gondolin".) }{\f1 THE FALLEN }{\i\f1 (= N\'famenor) }{\b\f1 Atalant\'eb  }{
\i\f1 -DAT/DANT/MC:222, Nam, SD:246, LT1:254, Silm:102/414, TAL\'c1T
\par   }{\f1 FALLOW }{\b\f1  marya}{\f1  (fawn, pale), }{\b\f1 malwa }{\f1 (pale) }{\i\f1 -MAD, SMAL
\par   }{\f1 FAMILIAR }{\b\f1 moina }{\f1 (dear) }{\i\f1 -MOY
\par   }{\f1 FAMILY }{\b\f1 noss\'eb }{\f1 (clan, "house"), }{\b\f1 n\'f3r\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 -nor }{\f1 (land, country, dwelling-place, nation, native land) }{\i\f1 -N\'d4, LT1:272
\par   }{\f1 FANE }{\b\f1 y\'e1na }{\f1 (holy place, sanctuary) }{\i\f1 -YAN
\par   }{\f1 FANG }{\b\f1 carca }{\f1 (tooth, tusk) }{\i\f1 -Silm:429, LT2:344  
\par   }{\f1 FAR }{\b\f1 haira}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 eccaira}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 avahaira}{\f1 ; FAR AWAY }{\i\f1 (adj) }{\b\f1 vahaia}{\f1 , FAR AWAY, FAR OFF }{\i\f1 (adv.) }{\b\f1 h\'e1ya}{\f1 ; FAR AND WIDE }{\b\f1 palan}{\f1 ; FAR-SEER }{\b\f1 palantir}{\f1 
, "FAR-WANDERER" }{\i\f1 (the name of a ship) }{\b\f1 Palarran }{\f1  }{\i\f1 -KHAYA, SD:247, Silm:435, TIR, UT:460}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 FAREWELL }{\b\f1 nam\'e1ri\'eb }{\i\f1 -Nam
\par   }{\f1 FARMER }{\b\f1 nandor }{\i\f1 (perhaps obsolete in LotR-style Quenya, clashing with the name of the }{\b\i\f1 Nandor}{\i\f1 , a tribe of Elves) -LT1:261}{\b\i\f1 
\par   }{\f1 FASTEN }{\b\f1 tac\'eb }{\f1 (3rd pers. sg. aorist), }{\i\f1 pa.t.}{\f1  }{\b\f1 tanc\'eb}{\i\f1 . -TAK
\par   }{\f1 FAT }{\b\f1 tiuca }{\f1 (thick); GROW FAT }{\b\f1 tiuya- }{\f1 (swell) }{\i\f1 -TIW
\par   }{\f1 FATE }{\b\f1 umbar }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 umbart}{\f1 -) }{\i\f1 (doom; the form }{\b\i\f1 amarto }{\i\f1 in LT2:348 is no doubt obsolete, but }{\b\i\f1 ambar }{\i\f1 from the same source may be a valid word also in LotR-style Quenya - see DOOM)}{\f1 , }{
\b\f1 marto }{\f1 (fortune, lot); }{\b\f1 manar}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 mand\'eb }{\f1 (doom, final end, fortune}{\i\f1  }{\f1 [}{\i\f1 usually}{\f1  = final bliss]); FATED }{\b\f1 marta}{\i\f1  -MBARAT/LotR:1157, MANAD
\par }{\b\i\f1   }{\f1 FATHER }{\b\f1 atar }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\f1 at\'e1ri}{\f1  }{\i\f1 in Silm, though Etym has }{\b\i\f1 atari}{\i\f1 ). }{\f1 FATHER OF ALL }{\b\f1 Il\'favatar }{\f1 (God) }{\i\f1 -Silm:428, 229/ATA/LT1:255, Silm:404/UT:446
\par   }{\f1 FATHOM }{\b\f1 rangw\'eb }{\i\f1 -RAK
\par   }{\f1 FAWN }{\b\f1 marya }{\f1 (fallow, pale) }{\i\f1 -MAD
\par   }{\f1 FAY OF THE COUNTRY }{\b\f1 nandin }{\f1 (dryad), FAY OF THE MEADS }{\b\f1 Nermi }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 Nermir }{\i\f1 is attested) }{\f1 (field-spirit) }{\i\f1 -LT1:261, 262
\par   }{\f1 F\'cbANOR }{\b\f1 F\'eban\'e1ro }{\f1 (Spirit of Fire) }{\i\f1 -Silm:397/435, MR:217
\par   }{\f1 FEAR }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 caur\'eb}{\f1 ; FEAR }{\i\f1 (vb) - }{\b\i\f1 rucin }{\i\f1 is glossed "I feel fear or horror", constructed with "from" of the object feared (e.g. *}{\b\i\f1 rucin Orcollon }{\i\f1 "I fear Orcs") -LT1:257, WJ:415
\par   }{\f1 FEAST }{\b\f1 meren}{\b\i\f1  }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 merend-}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 merend\'eb}{\b\i\f1  }{\f1 (festival); FESTIVE }{\b\f1 merya }{\i\f1 -MBER
\par   }{\f1 FEATHER }{\b\f1 quess\'eb}{\i\f1  -KWES, LotR:1157
\par   }{\f1 FEBRUARY }{\b\f1 N\'e9nim\'eb }{\i\f1 (}{\b\i\f1 Amillion }{\i\f1 in LT1:249 is hardly a valid word in LotR-style Quenya.) -LotR:1144
\par   }{\f1 FEEL FEAR OR HORROR }{\b\f1 rucin }{\i\f1 (1st pers. aorist), constructed with "from" of the object feared. -WJ:415}{\b\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 FELL }{\i\f1 (adj)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 aica }{\f1 (sharp, terrible, dire). -}{\i\f1 PM:347
\par }{\b\f1   }{\f1 FELL }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 helma }{\f1 (skin) }{\i\f1 -SKEL
\par   }{\f1 FEMALE }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 n\'ed}{\f1 , FEMALE }{\i\f1 (adj.)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 inya}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 inimeit\'eb }{\i\f1 (pl. probably *}{\b\i\f1 inimeisi}{\i\f1 ; cf. HANDED, LEAPING, WINDY) -INI
\par   }{\f1 FENCED FIELD }{\b\f1 peler}{\f1 , FENCING OR DEFENSIVE HEIGHTS }{\b\f1 Pel\'f3ri }{\i\f1 -PEL(ES), WJ:403
\par   }{\f1 FESTIVAL }{\b\f1 asar }{\f1 (Vanyarin }{\b\f1 athar}{\f1 ) (fixed time), }{\b\f1 meren}{\b\i\f1  }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 merend-}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 merend\'eb}{\b\i\f1  }{\f1 (feast); FESTIVE }{\b\f1 merya }{\i\f1 -WJ:399, MBER
\par   }{\f1 FETCH }{\b\f1 tulta}{\f1 - (send for, summon) }{\i\f1 -TUL
\par   }{\f1 FEY }{\b\f1 marta}{\f1  (fated) }{\i\f1 -MBARAT
\par }{\f1   FIELD-SPIRIT }{\b\f1 Nermi }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 Nermir }{\i\f1 is attested) }{\f1 (fay of the meads) }{\i\f1 -LT1:262
\par   }{\f1 FIERY }{\b\f1 uruit\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 \'faruva }{\i\f1 
(The stem from which these words are derived was struck out in Etym. However, several words that must be derived from this stem occur in LotR, indicating that Tolkien restored it. LT1:248 also gives }{\b\i\f1 s\'e1ra}{\i\f1 
 "fiery", but this word is probably obsoleted by }{\b\i\f1 s\'e1ra }{\i\f1 "bitter" in Etym.) -UR
\par   }{\f1 FIGHT }{\b\f1 mahta- }{\f1 (wield a weapon) }{\i\f1 -MAK
\par   }{\f1 FILL }{\b\f1 quat- }{\i\f1 (fut #}{\b\i\f1 quantuva}{\i\f1  is attested in }{\b\i\f1 enquantuva}{\i\f1 , "will refill") -WJ:392, Nam; cf. KWAT
\par   }{\f1 FINAL }{\b\f1 tyelima}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 m\'e9tima }{\f1 (ultimate, last); FINAL END }{\b\f1 mande}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 manar }{\f1 (fortune, bliss, fate), }{\b\f1 telda }{\f1 (last) }{\i\f1 -MC:222 cf. 215, MANAD, WJ:411
\par   }{\f1 FINARFIN }{\b\f1 Arafinw\'eb }{\i\f1 -MR:230
\par   }{\f1 FIND #}{\b\f1 hir-}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (only fut }{\b\i\f1 hiruva }{\i\f1 is attested)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 #tuv}{\f1 -}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (only perf #}{\b\i\f1 ut\'favi\'eb }{\i\f1 is attested [with pronominal endings: }{\b\i\f1 ut\'favienyes }{\i\f1 
"I have found it"]). It is difficult to say what distintion in meaning there may be between these words (if any at all); the verb #}{\b\i\f1 tuv}{\i\f1 - is evidently the same as }{\b\i\f1 tuvu}{\i\f1 
- in GL:71, there glossed "receive". -Nam/RGEO:67, LotR:1008 
\par   }{\f1 FINE }{\b\f1 tereva }{\i\f1 (acute, piercing) -TER
\par   }{\f1 FINE RAIN }{\b\f1 ross\'eb }{\f1 (dew, spray) }{\i\f1 -ROS cf. Letters:282
\par   }{\f1 FINGER }{\b\f1 leps\'eb}{\f1 ; FINGERED }{\b\f1 #lepta }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 raccalepta }{\i\f1 "clawfingered")}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -LEP, SD:68, 72}{\f1 
\par   FINGOLFIN }{\b\f1 Nolofinw\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -PM:344 (In the source,, }{\b\i\f1 Nolofinw\'eb}{\i\f1  is spelt with initial }{\b\i\f1 \'f1}{\i\f1 , that is, }{\b\i\f1 ng}{\i\f1 . Initial }{\b\i\f1 ng }{\i\f1 had become }{\b\i\f1 n }{\i\f1 
in Third Age Quenya, and I follow the spelling of LotR and transcribe it accordingly. But if this word is written in Tengwar, the initial }{\b\i\f1 n }{\i\f1 should be transcribed with the letter }{\b\i\f1 noldo}{\i\f1 , not }{\b\i\f1 n\'famen}{\i\f1 .)}{
\f1  
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 FINGON }{\b\f1 Findec\'e1no}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -PM:345
\par   }{\f1 FINISH }{\i\f1 (vb)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 tele- }{\i\f1 (intransitive) }{\f1 (end) }{\i\f1 (so in WJ:411 - LT1:267 gives }{\b\i\f1 telu}{\i\f1 -)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 telya- }{\f1 (}{\i\f1 transitive) }{\f1 (wind up, conclude)}{\i\f1 . Cf. also }{\b\i\f1 telma }
{\i\f1 "conclusion, anything used to finish off a work or affair", "often applied to the last item in a structure, such as a coping-stone, or a topmost pinnacle." }{\f1 FINISH }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 telu }{\i\f1 -WJ:411, LT1:267
\par   }{\f1 FINROD }{\b\f1 Findar\'e1to }{\i\f1 -Silm:428/PM:346
\par }{\b\f1   }{\f1 FIRE }{\b\f1 \'far }{\i\f1 
(the stem from which this word is derived was struck out in Etym. However, several words that must be derived from this stem occur in LotR, indicating that Tolkien restored it. But a more usual word for "fire" is apparently }{\b\i\f1 n\'e1r}{\i\f1 , }{
\b\i\f1 n\'e1r\'eb}{\i\f1 , which appear [with the masculine ending }{\b\i\f1 -o}{\i\f1 ] in the following names:) }{\f1 SPIRIT OF FIRE }{\b\f1 F\'eban\'e1ro }{\f1 (F\'ebanor), FELL FIRE}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 Aican\'e1ro }{\f1 (Sharp Flame, Aegnor) }{\i\f1 
(so in Silm:435; MR:323 has }{\b\i\f1 Aican\'e1r}{\i\f1 ). LT1:265 has }{\b\i\f1 s\'e1 }{\i\f1 "fire", poetic form }{\b\i\f1 sai}{\i\f1 , also }{\b\i\f1 sairin }{\i\f1 "fiery"; cf. also }{\b\i\f1 S\'e1ya}{\i\f1 
 "the fire-fay" in GL:66. LT:271 has the following "fire"-words: }{\f1 FIRE }{\b\f1 uru}{\f1 , FIERY }{\b\f1 uruvoit\'eb}{\f1 , ON FIRE }{\b\f1 urwa}{\f1 , LIKE FIRE }{\b\f1 ur\'fava}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 Cf. also }{\f1 FIREWOOD }{\b\f1 turu }{\i\f1 
(but the word was also used of wood in general)}{\f1 . BOWL OF FIRE}{\b\i\f1  }{\b\f1 tanyasalp\'eb }{\f1 (evindently #}{\b\f1 tanya }{\f1 "fire" + #}{\b\f1 salp\'eb }{\f1 "bowl")}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -UR, Silm:397, MR:217, LT1:265, 270, 271, 292
\par   }{\f1 FIRM }{\b\f1 tulca }{\f1 (strong, immovable, steadfast;}{\i\f1  Note:}{\f1  }{\i\f1 there is a homophone verb meaning "fix, set up, establish"}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 tulunca }{\f1 (steady), }{\b\f1 sanda }{\f1 (true, abiding), }{\b\f1 tanca }{\f1 
(fixed, sure) }{\i\f1 -TULUK, LT1:270, STAN, TAK
\par   }{\f1 FIRST }{\b\f1 minya }{\f1 (cf. }{\b\f1 Minyar }{\f1 "Firsts", the first clan among the Elves), }{\b\f1 inga}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 *yesta}{\f1 ; FIRSTBORN }{\i\f1 (= the Elves) }{\b\f1 Minn\'f3nar}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (}{\b\i\f1 *Yesta }{\i\f1 
is corrected from the actual reading }{\b\i\f1 esta}{\i\f1 ; see BEGINNING. For FIRSTBORN, Etym has }{\b\i\f1 Estanessi}{\i\f1 , which would similarly become }{\b\i\f1 *Yestanessi}{\i\f1 , but this word is propably obsoleted by the later [TLT] form }{
\b\i\f1 Minn\'f3nar}{\i\f1 . Writers should use the latter word.) FIRST-BEGOTTEN }{\b\i\f1 Minyon }{\i\f1 (a personal name. The element }{\b\i\f1 yon}{\i\f1 , translated "begotten", may be a reduced form of }{\b\i\f1 yondo }{\i\f1 
"son". Alternatively, and perhaps more likely, }{\b\i\f1 Minyon }{\i\f1 may be the adjective }{\b\i\f1 minya }{\i\f1 "first" turned into a masculine name by adding the masculine ending }{\b\i\f1 -on}{\i\f1 
. In that case, the literal meaning is simply *"First One". But it is possible that }{\b\i\f1 on }{\i\f1 is actually derived from the stem }{\b\i\f1 ONO }{\i\f1 "beget", and that
 "First-begotten" really is the literal meaning.) -MIN/Silm:434/WJ:420, ING, ESE, WJ:403
\par   }{\f1 FISH }{\b\f1 lingw\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (perhaps the general word, as opposed to }{\b\f1 hala}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 ,}{\i\f1  }{\f1 SMALL FISH}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 hala}{\f1 , "FISH-WATCHER" (i.e., kingsfisher, a bird) }{\b\f1 halatir}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 halatirn-}{
\f1 ) or }{\b\f1 halatirno}{\i\f1  -LIW, SKAL}{\i\f1\fs12 2}{\i\f1 , TIR
\par   }{\f1 FIST }{\b\f1 qu\'e1r\'eb }{\i\f1 (often used to mean "hand")}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (In compounds }{\b\i\f1 -quar}{\i\f1 : }{\b\i\f1 Telperinquar }{\i\f1 = Sindarin }{\f1 Celebrimbor}{\i\f1 
, "Silver-Fist, Hand of Silver". The first version of the stem KWAR yielded }{\b\i\f1 qu\'e1r}{\i\f1  pl. }{\b\i\f1 quari}{\i\f1 .) -KWAR, Silm:429/387
\par   }{\f1 FIT }{\b\f1 m\'e1ra }{\f1 (useful, good) }{\i\f1 -MAG
\par   }{\f1 FIVE }{\b\f1 lemp\'eb }{\i\f1 -LEP/GL:53
\par   }{\f1 FIX }{\b\f1 panya- }{\f1 (set), }{\b\f1 tulca- }{\f1 (establish, set up. }{\i\f1 Note: there is a homophone adjective meaning "firm, steadfast, strong, immoveable"}{\f1 ); FIXED }{\b\f1 tanca }{\f1 (sure, firm); BE FIXED }{\b\f1 mar- }{\f1 
(abide, be settled). FIXED TIME }{\b\f1 asar }{\f1 (-}{\b\f1 th}{\f1 -, Vanyarin }{\b\f1 athar}{\f1 ) (festival), FIXED IDEA }{\i\f1 see }{\f1 IDEA }{\i\f1 -PAN, LT1:270 cf. TULUK, TAK, UT:317, WJ:399}{\b\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 FLAG }{\b\f1 ambal }{\f1 (shaped stone) }{\i\f1 -MBAL
\par   }{\f1 FLAME }{\b\f1 n\'e1r}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 n\'e1r\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 velca}{\f1 ; SHARP-FLAME }{\b\f1 Aican\'e1ro }{\i\f1 (so in Silm:435; MR:323 has }{\b\i\f1 Aican\'e1r}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 , (Aegnor, Fell Fire), RED FLAME }{\b\f1 r\'fanya}{\f1 
; HEART OF FLAME }{\b\f1 Naira }{\i\f1 (a name of the Sun)}{\f1 , FLAME-COLOURED }{\b\f1 culina}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 culda }{\f1 (golden-red) }{\i\f1 -NAR}{\i\f1\fs12 1}{\i\f1 , LT1:260, Silm:437, MR:198, KUL
\par   }{\f1 FLAT }{\b\f1 l\'e1ra }{\i\f1 -DAL   
\par   }{\f1 FLEECE }{\b\f1 u\'eb }{\i\f1 -LT1:249
\par }{\b\f1   }{\f1 FLESH }{\b\f1 hr\'e1v\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 sarco}{\f1 ; FLESHY }{\b\f1 sarqua }{\i\f1 -MR:349, LT2:347
\par   }{\f1 FLINTHEARTED }{\b\f1 sincahonda }{\i\f1 -LotR:1015 cf. SD:68, 72
\par }{\f1 ?FLINTSTONE }{\b\f1 #sinca }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 sincahonda }{\i\f1 "flinthearted") -LotR:1015 cf. SD:68, 72}{\b\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 FLOAT }{\b\f1 lutu- }{\i\f1 (LT1:273 has }{\b\i\f1 wili- }{\i\f1 "sail, float, fly", but see FLY.)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -LT1:249
\par   }{\f1 FLOOD }{\i\f1 (tide)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 celum\'eb }{\f1 (stream, flow, flowing), }{\b\f1 ulund\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 l\'fato}{\f1 ; FLOODING }{\i\f1 (adj)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 \'fal\'eba }{\f1 (flowing, pouring) }{\i\f1 -ULU, KEL/MC:223, LT1:249
\par   }{\f1 FLOOR }{\b\f1 talan }{\f1 (#}{\b\f1 talam}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 talami}{\f1 ) (ground); PAVED FLOOR }{\b\f1 paca}{\f1  (court) }{\i\f1 -TAL, GL:63
\par   }{\f1 FLOUR }{\b\f1 por\'eb }{\f1 (meal) }{\i\f1 -POR
\par   }{\f1 FLOURISH }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 rinc\'eb }{\f1 (quick shake) }{\i\f1 -RIK
\par   }{\f1 FLOW }{\i\f1 (vb)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 sir-}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 lutta-}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 lutu-}{\f1 ;}{\b\f1  }{\f1 FLOW, FLOWING }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 celum\'eb}{\f1  (stream, flood); FLOWING }{\i\f1 (adj) }{\b\f1 \'fal\'eba }{\f1 (flooding, pouring), }{
\b\f1 s\'edrima }{\f1 (liquid). }{\i\f1 -SIR, LT1:249, KEL/MC:223, LT1:265}{\f1 
\par   FLOWER }{\i\f1 (large and single) }{\b\f1 l\'f3t\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (often -}{\b\i\f1 lot}{\i\f1  in compounds).}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (The word }{\b\i\f1 l\'f3t\'eb }{\i\f1 is usually applied to a large, single flower. From *}{\b\i\f1 ambalots\'eb }{\i\f1 
"uprising-flower" [q.v.] #}{\b\i\f1 lots\'eb }{\i\f1 can be isolated; this may be the more general word for "flower".)}{\b\f1  }{\f1 FLOWER OF THE WEST }{\i\f1 (a floral design)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 N\'famell\'f3te}{\f1 .}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 Cf. also }{\b\i\f1 indil
}{\i\f1 , "lily, or other large single flower". }{\f1  PUT FORTH LEAVES OR FLOWERS *}{\b\f1 lohta- }{\i\f1 (corrected from the actual reading }{\b\i\f1 lokta }{\i\f1 because Tolkien later decided that }{\b\i\f1 kt }{\i\f1 became }{\b\i\f1 ht }{\i\f1 
in Quenya)}{\f1  (sprout) }{\i\f1 -LOT(H), LT1:259, WJ:318, UT:227, 458, WJ:399, LT:258
\par   }{\f1 FLUTE }{\b\f1 simpa}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 simpina }{\f1 (pipe); FLUTER }{\b\f1 timpinen}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -LT1:266, 268
\par   }{\f1 FLUTTERING TO AND FRO }{\b\f1 wilwa }{\i\f1 -MC:223
\par   }{\f1 FLY }{\b\f1 wilin}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("I fly", 1st pers. aorist)}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 pa.t. }{\b\f1 will\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (cf. }{\b\i\f1 wili- }{\i\f1 "sail, float, fly" in LT1:273).}{\f1  FLY OR STREAM IN THE WIND }{\b\f1 hlapu}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (part. }{
\b\i\f1 hl\'e1pula }{\i\f1 is attested)}{\f1 , FLYING }{\b\f1 rimpa}{\f1  (rushing); SEND FLYING }{\b\f1 horta- }{\i\f1 -WIL, MC:223, RIP, KHOR
\par   }{\f1 FOAM }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 falasta- }{\i\f1 (part. }{\b\i\f1 falastala }{\i\f1 is attested); }{\f1 FOAM }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 fall\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 winga }{\f1 (spray), }{\b\f1 wing\'eb }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 wingi}{\f1 -)}{\b\f1  }{\f1 
(crest [of wave], spindrift). }{\i\f1 -MC:222/223, PHAL, WIG, LT1:273
\par   }{\f1 FOG }{\b\f1 h\'eds\'eb }{\f1 (mist. }{\i\f1 Note: a homophone means "dusk"}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 hisw\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 hui }{\f1 (murk, dark, night) }{\i\f1 -KHIS, LT1:253
\par   }{\f1 FOIL }{\i\f1 (plant) }{\b\f1 as\'eba}{\f1  -}{\i\f1 LotR:899
\par   }{\f1 FOLIAGE }{\b\f1 olassi\'eb}{\f1  (collection of leaves) }{\i\f1 -Letters:282
\par   }{\f1 FOLK }{\b\f1 hos }{\i\f1 -LT2:340
\par   }{\f1 FOLLOW }{\b\f1 hilya-}{\i\f1  }{\f1 FOLLOWER }{\b\f1 neuro}{\f1 ; FOLLOWERS }{\i\f1 (an Elvish name of Men) }{\b\f1 Hildor}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Hildi }{\i\f1 (unattested sg }{\b\i\f1 #Hildo}{\i\f1 ; dative pl }{\b\i\f1 hildin}{\i\f1 
 is attested; cf also }{\b\i\f1 Hildinyar }{\i\f1 "my heirs" in Aragorn's oath)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -KHIL/Silm:116/122/403, FS/WJ:387, LotR:1003, 1004
\par   }{\f1 FOOD }{\i\f1 (cooked) }{\b\f1 apsa }{\i\f1 -AP
\par   }{\f1 FOOT }{\b\f1 t\'e1l }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 tal-}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (These forms probably obsolete }{\b\i\f1 tala }{\i\f1 pl }{\b\i\f1 talwi }{\i\f1 in LT2:347.)}{\f1  FOOTPRINT }{\b\f1 runya }{\f1 (slot) }{\i\f1 -TAL, RUN      
\par   }{\f1 FOR }{\b\f1 an}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Nam: }{\b\i\f1 an s\'ed...Varda...m\'e1ryat...ortan\'eb}{\i\f1 , "for now...Varda...has uplifted her hands". Note: }{\b\i\f1 an }{\i\f1 is also gl
ossed "to, till".) English "for" meaning "for the benefit of" will often be rendered by the dative ending -}{\b\i\f1 n}{\i\f1  (pl -}{\b\i\f1 in}{\i\f1 ); e.g. }{\b\i\f1 nin }{\i\f1 "for me". -Nam
\par   }{\f1 FORBID }{\b\f1 v\'e1quet- }{\f1 (refuse, say no) }{\i\f1 (1st pers. sg aorist and past }{\b\i\f1 v\'e1quetin}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 v\'e1quenten }{\i\f1 are given)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 avaquet}{\f1 - (refuse) }{\i\f1 (pa.t. is no doubt *}{\b\i\f1 avaquent
\'eb}{\i\f1 ; cf. }{\b\i\f1 quet- }{\i\f1 under SAY) -WJ:370, KWET
\par }{\f1 #FORD }{\b\f1 tarna }{\i\f1 (This gloss is isolated from }{\b\i\f1 Taruktarna }{\i\f1 "Oxford", q.v. Tolkien glossed }{\b\i\f1 tarna }{\i\f1 as "crossing, passage") -LT1:347}{\f1 
\par ?FOREIGN }{\i\f1 (Tolkien's handwriting was illegible) }{\b\f1 ettelen }{\i\f1 -ET
\par }{\f1   FORESIGHT *}{\b\f1 apacen }{\i\f1 (lit. *"after-sight", a vision of something that will come after the present. In MR:216, }{\b\i\f1 apaceny\'eb }{\i\f1 
is translated "foresight"; yet the context and the form of the word itself clearly indicates that it is actually the pl. form of an adjective #}{\b\i\f1 apacenya }{\i\f1 "of foresight". The noun "foresight" is almost certainly *}{\b\i\f1 apacen}{\i\f1 
; cf. }{\b\i\f1 tercen }{\i\f1 "insight".) -MR:216}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 FOREST }{\b\f1 taur\'eb }{\f1 ([great] wood) }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 tauri }{\i\f1 is attested)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tauno}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 m\'e1los }{\i\f1 (the two latter may not be valid words in Tolkien's later Quenya)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
-TAWAR/Silm:438/MC:222 cf 215/VT39:7, LT2:342, LT1:267
\par   }{\f1 FORGE - }{\i\f1 LT1:250 gives }{\b\i\f1 tamin}{\i\f1 , but this word is probably obsoleted by }{\b\i\f1 tamin }{\i\f1 "I tap" in Etym. 
\par }{\f1   FORLORN }{\b\f1 \'fana}{\f1  (deprived of, destitute) }{\i\f1 -VT39:14
\par   }{\f1 FORM }{\b\f1 car- }{\f1 (make}{\i\f1 , q.v.}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 -WJ:391
\par   }{\f1 FORMER, THE }{\b\f1 yara }{\i\f1 (that)}{\f1 ;}{\b\f1  }{\f1 FORMER DAYS }{\b\f1 y\'e1r\'eb}{\f1 ; FORMER TIMES }{\b\f1 yal\'fam\'eb}{\f1 ; FORMERLY }{\b\f1 y\'e1 }{\f1 (ago), BELONGING TO OR DESCENDING FROM FORMER TIMES }{\b\f1 y\'e1ra }{\f1 
(ancient) }{\i\f1 -YA}{\f1 
\par   FORSAKE }{\b\f1 hehta- }{\i\f1 (pa.t. }{\b\i\f1 hehtan\'eb }{\i\f1 is given but seems perfectly regular) }{\f1 (put aside, leave out, exclude, abandon); FORSAKEN ELVES }{\i\f1 see EGLATH. }{\f1 ONE LOST OR FORSAKEN BY FRIENDS }{\b\f1 hecil}{\f1  }{
\i\f1 (gender-spesific forms are }{\b\i\f1 hecilo }{\i\f1 m. and }{\b\i\f1 hecil\'eb }{\i\f1 f.) }{\f1 (waif, outcast, outlaw) }{\i\f1 -WJ:365}{\f1 
\par   FORT }{\b\f1 arta }{\f1 (fortress) }{\i\f1 (Note: }{\b\i\f1 arta}{\i\f1  also means "across, athwart") -GARAT (see 3AR)
\par   }{\f1 FORTH }{\b\f1 et- }{\i\f1 (prefix) }{\f1 (out) }{\i\f1 -ET}{\f1 
\par   FORTRESS }{\b\f1 arta }{\f1 (fort) }{\i\f1 (Note: }{\b\i\f1 arta }{\i\f1 also means "across, athwart") -GARAT (see 3AR)
\par   }{\f1 FORTUNE }{\i\f1 (good)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 alma}{\b\i\f1  }{\f1 (weal, wealth); }{\b\f1 mand\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 manar }{\f1 (final end, doom, fate); }{\b\f1 heren }{\f1 (governance, what is in store for one or what one has in store); }{\b\f1 marto }{
\f1 (fate, lot); FORTUNATE }{\b\f1 herenya }{\f1 (wealthy, blessed, rich) }{\i\f1 -GALA, MAN/MANAD, KHER, LT2:348}{\f1 
\par   FOUL }{\b\f1 saura }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (evil-smelling, putrid); }{\i\f1 in compounds }{\b\i\f1 sauri- }{\i\f1 as in}{\f1  FOULBELLIED }{\b\f1 sauricumba}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 
The latter form may indicate that this adjective also appears in an alternative form *}{\b\i\f1 saur\'eb}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 sauri}{\i\f1 -.}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -THUS, SD:68, 72
\par   }{\f1 FOUNDATION }{\b\f1 talma }{\f1 (base, root) }{\i\f1 -TAL
\par   }{\f1 FOUNTAIN }{\b\f1 ehtel\'eb }{\f1 (issue of water, spring).}{\i\f1 The actual readng in LT1 and LT2 is }{\b\i\f1 ektel\'eb}{\i\f1 , but Tolkien later decided that }{\b\i\f1 kt }{\i\f1 became }{\b\i\f1 ht }{\i\f1 
in Quenya. The new form of the word is attested in Silm. LT also gives the form }{\b\i\f1 kektel\'eb}{\i\f1 , that would likewise become }{\b\i\f1 *cehtel\'eb}{\i\f1 .) -LT1:257, LT2:338
\par   }{\f1 FOUR }{\b\f1 canta}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 (prefix:) }{\b\f1 can- }{\i\f1 -KAN\'c1T
\par   }{\f1 FOX }{\b\f1 rusco }{\i\f1 -PM:353
\par   }{\f1 FREE }{\i\f1 (adj.)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 l\'e9ra}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 mirima}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (of a person, as opposed to:)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 latin}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 latina}{\i\f1  }{\f1 (open, cleared [of land]), }{\b\f1 lerina}{\f1 
 ("free" of things in the sense of "not guarded, reserved, made fast, or 'owned'", VT41:5), Cf. also }{\b\f1 lehta}{\f1  "free, released". FREE ELEMENT (a term for "vowel") #}{\b\f1 lehta tengw\'eb}{\f1  (only pl. }{\b\f1 lehta tengwi}{\f1 
 is attested; we would rather expect *}{\b\f1 leht\'eb tengwi}{\f1 ). }{\i\f1 (A word }{\b\i\f1 fair\'eb}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 "free" is mentioned in LT1:250, but may be obso
lete: several other meanings are attributed to this word in later writings [see DEATH, PHANTOM, RADIANCE]. However, }{\b\i\f1 fairi\'eb }{\i\f1 "freedom" does not clash with later words.) }{\f1 FREE FROM EVIL }{\b\f1 aman }{\i\f1 
(see BLESSED) -VT41:5, MIS, LAT, VT39:17, WJ:399
\par   }{\f1 FREEZE }{\b\f1 niqu\'eb- }{\f1 ("it is cold, it freezes"). }{\i\f1 LT1:254 gives }{\b\i\f1 hilcin }{\i\f1 "it freezes", but in LotR-style Quenya this will have to mean, if anything, "I freeze" (1st pers. aorist). -WJ:417, LT1:254
\par   }{\f1 FREQUENT }{\b\f1 rimba }{\i\f1 -RIM
\par   }{\f1 FRESH }{\b\f1 venya}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 wenya }{\f1 (yellow-green, green); FRESHNESS }{\b\f1 v\'e9n}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 w\'e9n }{\f1 (youth, greenness) }{\i\f1 -GWEN
\par   }{\f1 FRESHLET }{\b\f1 celuss\'eb }{\f1 (water falling out swiftly from a rocky spring) }{\i\f1 -UT:426
\par  }{\f1  FRIEND }{\b\f1 m\'e1lo}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 meldo}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (pl }{\b\i\f1 meldor }{\i\f1 is attested)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 nildo }{\i\f1 (m.)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 nild\'eb }{\i\f1 (f.)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 sermo}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 seron }{\f1 (}{\i\f1 m.)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 
serm\'eb }{\i\f1 (f.)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 -ser }{\i\f1 (final element in compounds), }{\b\f1 -}{\f1 (}{\b\f1 n}{\f1 )}{\b\f1 dil }{\i\f1 (final element in compounds, e.g. }{\b\i\f1 Elendil}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 Anardil}{\i\f1 ,}{\b\i\f1  Valandil }{\i\f1 
- sometimes translated "lover" rather than "friend". When the first part of the compound ends in }{\b\i\f1 l}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 n}{\i\f1 , or }{\b\i\f1 r}{\i\f1 , the }{\b\i\f1 n }{\i\f1 of }{\b\i\f1 -ndil }{\i\f1 is left out). }{\f1 FRIENDLY }{\b\f1 
nilda}{\b\i\f1  }{\f1 (lovely), FRIENDSHIP}{\b\f1  nilm\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -MEL, WJ:412, NIL, SER, Letters:386}{\f1 
\par   FROM }{\b\f1 ho}{\f1  - }{\i\f1 but}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 English "from" will often be rendered by employing the ablative case, endings }{\b\i\f1 -llo}{\i\f1 , pl }{\b\i\f1 -llon }{\i\f1 or }{\b\i\f1 -llor}{\i\f1 , dual }{\b\i\f1 -lto}{\i\f1 , e.g. }{\b\i\f1 
E\'e4rello }{\i\f1 *"from the Sea". -3O}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 LotR:1003}{\f1 
\par   FROST }{\b\f1 nix\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ringw\'eb }{\f1 (rime),}{\b\f1  }{\f1 FROST-PATTERNS }{\b\f1 niquis}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 niquess\'eb }{\i\f1 (the latter by association with }{\b\i\f1 quess\'eb }{\i\f1 "feather") -WJ:417, LT1:265
\par   }{\f1 FROZEN }{\b\f1 halcin }{\i\f1 -LT1:254
\par   }{\f1 FRUIT }{\b\f1 y\'e1v\'eb }{\i\f1 (so in Etym and Silm:439; LT1:273 has }{\b\i\f1 y\'e1va}{\i\f1 ). }{\f1 BEAR FRUIT }{\b\f1 yavin }{\i\f1 (which must mean *"I bear fruit", stem #}{\b\i\f1 yav-}{\i\f1 
. Tolkien often employs the 1st person aorist when mentioning a verb in his wordlists.) -YAB, LT1:273
\par   }{\f1 FULL }{\b\f1 quanta}{\f1 ; FULL TO THE BRIM, WITH MOUTH FULL }{\b\f1 penquanta}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("pe\'f1)}{\f1 , FULLY }{\b\f1 aqua }{\f1 (completely, altogether, wholly); FULL WRITING (= }{\i\f1 writing with separate symbols for vowels}{\f1 ) }{
\b\f1 quanta sarm\'eb}{\f1 , FULL STOP }{\i\f1 (in Tengwar punctuation - probably the symbol }{\b\f1 :}{\i\f1 ) }{\b\f1 pusta }{\f1 (stop), FULL SIGN #}{\b\f1 quanta tengw\'eb}{\f1  (only pl. }{\b\f1 quant\'eb tengwi}{\f1 
 is attested). In early Elvish analysis of Quenya, this was the term for a consonant + a vowel (this was analyzed as a kind of unitary phoneme rather than two phonemes; hence a stem like }{\i\f1 mata}{\f1 - "eat" was analyzed as two }{\i\f1 quant\'eb
 tengwi}{\f1 : }{\i\f1 ma}{\f1  + }{\i\f1 ta}{\f1 ).}{\i\f1  -KWAT, VT39:11, WJ:392, VT39:8, PUS
\par   }{\f1 FUNGUS }{\b\f1 hwan}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 hwand}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 hwandi}{\f1 )}{\i\f1  }{\f1 (sponge) }{\i\f1 -SWAD
\par      
\par }{\b\f1\fs24   <G>}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 GALADRIEL }{\b\f1 Alt\'e1riel}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (}{\b\i\f1 Altariell-}{\i\f1 ; gen. }{\b\i\f1 Altariello}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 is attested. }{\b\i\f1 Alt\'e1riel }{\i\f1 
is the form used in Noldorin Quenya, Galadriel's own mother-tongue; the Telerin form is }{\b\i\f1 Alat\'e1riel}{\i\f1  [UT:266]. According to PM:347 [that gives }{\b\i\f1 Altariel}{\i\f1  with no long }{\b\i\f1 \'e1}{\i\f1 
] the true Quenya equivalent of the Telerin form would have been }{\b\i\f1 \'d1altariel}{\i\f1 , but this form was apparently not used.) -Silm:433, RGEO:66 
\par   }{\f1 GAME }{\b\f1 tyali\'eb }{\f1 (sport, play) }{\i\f1 -TYAL/LT1:260
\par   }{\f1 GANDALF }{\b\f1 Ol\'f3rin }{\i\f1 (his name in Valinor, derived from a stem meaning "dream" - not an actual translation of "Gandalf", meaning "Elf of the Wand", a name he was given by peo
ple who did not know that he was actually a Maia.) -LotR:391, UT:396 cf. 391 
\par   }{\f1 GAOL #}{\b\f1 mando }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 Angamando }{\i\f1 "Iron-Gaol"; }{\b\i\f1 mando }{\i\f1 is also defined as "safe keeping"). -MR:350
\par   }{\f1 GAP }{\b\f1 f\'e1s\'eb }{\f1 (gulf) }{\i\f1 -GL:36
\par   }{\f1 GARLAND }{\b\f1 r\'eda}{\f1  (wreathe); MAIDEN CROWNED WITH A FESTIVAL GARLAND }{\b\f1 riell\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -PM:347
\par   }{\f1 GASH }{\b\f1 ciriss\'eb }{\f1 (slash), }{\b\f1 hyats\'eb }{\f1 (cleft)}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 -KIRIS, SYAD
\par   }{\f1 GATE }{\b\f1 ando}{\f1 ;}{\b\f1  }{\f1 GREAT GATE }{\b\f1 andon }{\f1 (pl }{\b\f1 andondi}{\f1 ). }{\i\f1 (LT1:264 has }{\b\i\f1 osto }{\i\f1 "the gates of the Sun" and }{\b\i\f1 Ostor }{\i\f1 "East", but in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 osto }
{\i\f1 means "town" or "fortress".) -AD, LotR:1157, LT1:264}{\f1 
\par   GATHER }{\b\f1 hosta- }{\f1 (collect, assemble); GATHERING }{\i\f1 (of three or more coming from different directions) }{\b\f1 yomeni\'eb }{\f1 (meeting) }{\i\f1 -MC:223, WJ:407    
\par   }{\f1 GENEROUS }{\b\f1 faila }{\f1 (fair-minded, just) }{\i\f1 -PM:352
\par   }{\f1 GENTLE }{\b\f1 moica}{\f1  (soft), GENTLE BREEZE }{\b\f1 v\'edl\'eb }{\i\f1 -GL:58, LT1:273}{\f1 
\par   GET }{\b\f1 net}{\f1 - (pa.t. }{\b\f1 nent\'eb}{\f1  given) -}{\i\f1  QL:66
\par   }{\f1 GET LOW }{\i\f1 (of the Sun) }{\b\f1 n\'fameta-}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 n\'famenda- }{\i\f1 -LT1:263
\par   }{\f1 GERM }{\b\f1 erd\'eb }{\f1 (seed. }{\i\f1 Note: a homophone means "person".) -ER\'c9D
\par }{\f1   GESTURE-CODE }{\b\f1 hwerm\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -WJ:395, VT39:5}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 GIANT }{\b\f1 norsa }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (see also MONSTER) -NOROTH
\par }{\f1   GIFT }{\b\f1 anna}{\f1 ;}{\i\f1  }{\f1 GIVE }{\b\f1 anta}{\f1 - (present); GIVER }{\b\f1 ant\'eb}{\i\f1  (f), }{\b\f1 anto }{\i\f1 (m)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (the latter word from Etym is probably obsoleted by }{\b\i\f1 anto }{\i\f1 
"mouth" in LotR:1157 - an alternative word for "[male] giver" might be }{\b\i\f1 *antaro}{\i\f1 ). }{\f1 LAND OF GIFT }{\i\f1 (a name of N\'famenor)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 Andor}{\i\f1  }{\f1 (haplology of *}{\b\f1 Annandor}{\f1 ), DEAR GIFT}{\i\f1  (the mea
ning of Melian's name)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 Melyanna }{\i\f1 -ANA, LotR:1157, Silm:313, 434
\par   }{\f1 GIMILZ\'d4R }{\b\f1 Telemnar }{\i\f1 -UT:223
\par   }{\f1 GIMLET }{\b\f1 teret }{\f1 (auger) }{\i\f1 -LT1:255
\par   }{\f1 GIRDLE #}{\b\f1 lesta }{\i\f1 (isolated from #}{\b\i\f1 Lestan\'f3r\'eb}{\i\f1 ; see DORIATH. }{\b\i\f1 #Lesta }{\i\f1 is the cognate of Sindarin }{\b\i\f1 lest }{\i\f1 as in }{\b\i\f1 Lest }{\i\f1 [or }{\b\i\f1 List}{\i\f1 ] }{\b\i\f1 Melian }{
\i\f1 "the Girdle of Melian" [WJ:228]. Note: #}{\b\i\f1 lesta }{\i\f1 also means "measure".) -WJ:369, Silm:390
\par   }{\f1 GIRL }{\b\f1 wen }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 wendi}{\i\f1 ) }{\f1 (maid) }{\i\f1 -LT1:271
\par   }{\f1 GIVE }{\b\f1 anta- }{\i\f1 -ANA
\par   }{\f1 GIVE BIRTH}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 nosta- }{\i\f1 (but in later sources, }{\b\i\f1 nosta- }{\i\f1 is glossed "beget") -LT1:272
\par   }{\f1 GIVEN (OR ADDED) NAME }{\b\f1 aness\'eb }{\i\f1 (pl }{\b\i\f1 anessi }{\i\f1 is attested. This word}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 encompasses both "after-names" and "mother-names".) -MR:217
\par   }{\f1 GLAMHOTH }{\b\f1 Sancossi }{\i\f1 (see GOBLIN) -LT2:341
\par }{\f1   GLASS }{\b\f1 hyell\'eb}{\f1 ;}{\b\f1  }{\f1 LITTLE GLASS }{\b\f1 lipil}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 Cf. also }{\b\i\f1 v\'edrin}{\i\f1 , "a magic glassy substance of great lucency used in fashioning the Moon" -KHYEL, LT1:258, LT2:339
\par   }{\f1 GLAURUNG }{\i\f1 see }{\f1 GLORUND}{\i\f1 
\par   }{\f1 GLEAM (WHITE) }{\b\f1 ilca-}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (part. }{\b\i\f1 ilcala }{\i\f1 is attested)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -MC:223
\par   }{\f1 GLINT }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 tin\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (pres 3rd pers sg)}{\f1 ;}{\b\f1  }{\f1 GLINT }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 tind\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 wintil}{\f1 ;}{\b\f1  }{\f1 GLINTING }{\b\f1 tinda }{\f1 (silver)}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 -TIN, LT1:261}{
\f1 
\par   GLITTER }{\b\f1 mirilya-}{\f1 ; GLITTERING }{\b\f1 rilya }{\i\f1 (brilliance)}{\f1 ; GLITTERING LIGHT }{\b\f1 rilma}{\f1 ; GLITTERING REFLECTION }{\b\f1 nalta}{\f1  (radiance - }{\b\i\f1 alata}{\i\f1  in Silm:433 is the Telerin form. In PM:347, }{
\b\i\f1 nalta}{\i\f1  is spelt with initial }{\b\i\f1 \'f1}{\i\f1 , that is, }{\b\i\f1 ng}{\i\f1 . Initial }{\b\i\f1 ng }{\i\f1 had become }{\b\i\f1 n }{\i\f1 in Third Age Quenya, and I follow the system of LotR and transcribe it accordi
ngly. But if this word is written in Tengwar, the initial }{\b\i\f1 n }{\i\f1 should be transcribed with the letter }{\b\i\f1 noldo}{\i\f1 , not }{\b\i\f1 n\'famen}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -MBIRIL, RIL, PM:347}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 GLOBE }{\b\f1 coron}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (#}{\b\i\f1 corn}{\i\f1 -, as in dat.sg. }{\b\i\f1 cornen}{\i\f1 ) }{\f1 (ball); GLOBED }{\b\f1 corna }{\f1 (round) }{\i\f1 -KOR}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 GLOOM }{\b\f1 ungw\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 lumb\'eb }{\f1 (shadow), }{\b\f1 huin\'eb }{\f1 (darkness, shadow), }{\b\f1 l\'f3m\'eb }{\f1 (night, twilight, darkness, dusk), }{\b\f1 yaru}{\f1 ; GLOOMY }{\b\f1 morna }{\f1 
(black, dark, sombre); CHILD OF GLOOM }{\b\f1 l\'f3m\'ebar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (probably not a valid word in LotR-style Quenya)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -U\'d1G, LUM, VT41:8, GL:37, LT1:255, Silm:431
\par   }{\f1 GLORIOUS }{\b\f1 alcarinqua }{\f1 (radiant) }{\i\f1 (The shorter form }{\b\i\f1 alcarin }{\i\f1 is attested as a title of king Atanatar II. Cf. also }{\b\i\f1 Alcarinqu\'eb}{\i\f1 , a name of Jupiter.) -AKLA-R-, WJ:412, RGEO:73/LotR:1075, Silm:55

\par   }{\f1 GLORUND, GLORUNN }{\b\f1 Laurundo}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Undolaur\'eb }{\i\f1 (Tolkien later changed Glorund to Glaurung. Read }{\b\i\f1 *Laurungo}{\i\f1 , *}{\b\i\f1 Ungolaur\'eb }{\i\f1 in Quenya?) -LT2:341
\par   }{\f1 GLORY }{\b\f1 alcar}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 alcar\'eb }{\f1 (splendour, brilliance) }{\i\f1 -AKLA-R-/RGEO:73/UT:317/WJ:369/Silm:427
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx3119\adjustright {\i\f1   }{\f1 GNOME }{\i\f1 (only = wise one, Noldo) }{\b\f1 Noldo }{\i\f1 (spelt }{\b\i\f1 Ngoldo }{\i\f1 [}{\b\i\f1 \'d1oldo}{\i\f1 ] in Tengwar writing, reflecting the earlier pronounciation)}{\f1 
; pl. }{\b\f1 Noldor }{\f1 is attested}{\i\f1 . }{\f1 GNOMISH }{\i\f1 (general adjective:) }{\b\f1 Noldorinwa}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 (Gnomish language:) }{\b\f1 Noldorin}{\f1 ,}{\b\f1  }{\f1 GNOME-LAND }{\b\f1 Noldomar -}{\i\f1 
LT1:262, Silm:61, LotR:1157, VT39:16
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx2694\adjustright {\i\f1   }{\f1 GO }{\b\f1 lelya- }{\f1 or }{\b\f1 linna- }{\i\f1 (pa.t. }{\b\i\f1 lend\'eb }{\i\f1 in both cases) }{\f1 (proceed, travel); }{\b\f1 vanya- }{\f1 (pa.t. }{\b\f1 vann\'eb}{\f1 )}{\i\f1  }{\f1 
(depart, disappear), GO ROUND }{\b\f1 pel- }{\f1 (revolve, return); GO ATHWART }{\b\f1 tara- }{\f1 (cross); GO AWAY }{\b\f1 auta- }{\f1 (leave, pass); }{\i\f1 pa.t. }{\b\f1 oant\'eb}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 perf. }{\b\f1 oanti\'eb }{\i\f1 
(in the physical sense "went away [to another place]", }{\b\f1 v\'e1n\'eb }{\i\f1 ("the most frequently used past [tense]" - less "physical" than }{\b\i\f1 oant\'eb}{\i\f1 , rather meaning to be lost or to disappear), also }{\b\f1 anw\'eb }{\i\f1 
(this pa.t. was "only found in archaic language"), perf. }{\b\f1 av\'e1ni\'eb }{\i\f1 (pl }{\b\i\f1 av\'e1nier }{\i\f1 is attested); perf. }{\b\i\f1 v\'e1ni\'eb }{\i\f1 with no augment may occur in verse. }{\f1 CAUSE TO GO (in a desired direction) }{
\b\f1 menta}{\f1 - (send), GONE }{\b\f1 vanwa }{\f1 (departed, vanished, dead, lost, past and over, no longer to be had) BE GONE! }{\b\f1 heca! }{\i\f1 - also with pronominal affixes: }{\f1 sg }{\b\f1 hecat}{\f1 , pl }{\b\f1 hecal }{\f1 
"you be gone!" (stand aside!) }{\i\f1 -WJ:363, LED, PEL, LT2:347, WAN,  Nam, WJ:364, VT41:5, WJ:366
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\f1   }{\f1 GOAT }{\i\f1 - she-goat:}{\f1  }{\b\f1 ny\'e9ni }{\i\f1 -LT1:262
\par   }{\f1 GOBLET }{\b\f1 s\'falo}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 fion }{\i\f1 -SUG (see SUK), LT1:253
\par   }{\f1 GOBLIN }{\i\f1 (Orc) }{\b\f1 urco}{\f1  (pl }{\b\f1 urqui}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 or}{\f1  }{\b\f1 orco }{\f1 (pl.}{\b\f1  orqui }{\f1 or }{\b\f1 orcor}{\f1 );}{\i\f1  }{\f1 THE GOBLINS }{\b\f1 Sancossi }{\i\f1 (}{\b\i\f1 sanc\'eb }{\i\f1 "hateful" + }{
\b\i\f1 hossi }{\i\f1 "armies", said to be the Quenya equivalent of Sindarin }{\b\i\f1 Glamhoth}{\i\f1 ) 
\par -\'d3ROK, LT2:202/MR:74/WJ:390, LT2:341
\par   }{\f1 GOD }{\b\f1 Eru }{\i\f1 ("The One, He that is Alone", a proper name that can hardly be used as a common noun meaning "god" in general. }{\b\i\f1 Eru }{\i\f1 obsoletes }{\b\i\f1 Enu }{\i\f1 in LT2:343)}{\f1 ,}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 Il\'favatar}{\f1 
 "Father of All", }{\b\f1 Ainatar }{\f1 *"Holy-Father" }{\i\f1 (titles of God)}{\f1 ,}{\i\f1  }{\f1 PAGAN GOD }{\b\f1 ainu}{\f1 , PAGAN GODDESS}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 aini}{\i\f1  }{\f1 (angelic spirit, holy one).}{\i\f1  (As
 Christopher Tolkien notes, the Ainur are of course not "pagan" to the people of Middle-earth. In Etym and Silm, }{\b\i\f1 Ainu/Aini }{\i\f1 is capitalized.) -Silm:15/396/431, LT1:248 cf. AYAN and Silm:426
\par   }{\f1 GOLD }{\i\f1 (the metal) }{\b\f1 malta }{\i\f1 (so in LotR - Etym has }{\b\i\f1 malda}{\i\f1  [stem SMAL], but cf. }{\b\i\f1 smalta }{\i\f1 mentioned under}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 LAWAR)}{\f1 ;}{\i\f1  }{\f1 GOLD }{\b\f1 laur\'eb}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 
(= "not the metal but the colour, what we should call golden light", Letters:308, "of light and colour, not of the metal", Silm:433, "not a metallic word. It was applied to those things which we often call '
golden' though they do not much resemble metallic gold: golden light, especially sunlight", RGEO:70, "a word for golden light or colour, never used for the metal", PM:353, "light of the golden Tree }{\f1 Laurelin}{\i\f1 
", LR:368; a "mystic name" of gold, LT1:255 [no doubt an obsolete notion]; in LT1:258 and LT2:341 the gloss is simply "gold".)}{\f1  RED GOLD \'86}{\b\f1 cullo}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (obsoleting }{\b\i\f1 culu }{\i\f1 in LT2:341? In LT1:255 }{\b\i\f1 culu }{\i\f1 
is said to be a poetic word for "gold", but also used mythically as a name of all red and yellow metals),}{\f1  GOLDEN }{\b\f1 laur\'eba }{\i\f1 (pl }{\b\i\f1 lauri\'eb }{\i\f1 is attested; LT1:258 has }{\b\i\f1 laurina}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 , GOLDEN-RED }{\b\f1 
culda}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 culina }{\f1 (flame-coloured); }{\i\f1 (cf. Silm. Appendix: "}{\b\i\f1 cul- }{\i\f1 'golden-red' in }{\b\i\f1 Cul\'farien}{\i\f1 ") -LotR:1157/SMAL, Letters:308/RGEO:70/LAWAR, KUL, RGEO:70/Nam, Silm:429  
\par   }{\f1 GONDOLIN }{\b\f1 Ondolind\'eb }{\i\f1 ("Stone Song", so in Silm:149, 415; LT1:254 gives }{\b\i\f1 Ondolinda}{\i\f1 , changed from }{\b\i\f1 Ondolin}{\i\f1 ) -LT1:254
\par   }{\f1 GONE }{\b\f1 vanwa }{\f1 (departed, lost, past) }{\i\f1 -WAN, Nam      
\par   }{\f1 GONG }{\b\f1 tombo }{\i\f1 -LT1:269
\par   }{\f1 GOOD }{\i\f1 (of things) }{\b\f1 m\'e1ra }{\f1 (fit, useful), GOOD }{\i\f1 (morally good) }{\b\f1 man\'eb}{\f1 ; GOODBYE }{\b\f1 m\'e1ra mesta   }{\i\f1 -MAG (see MA3), LT1:260, Arct
\par   }{\f1 GOODS }{\b\f1 armar }{\i\f1 (sg }{\b\f1 #}{\b\i\f1 arma}{\i\f1  if there is a sg) -3AR
\par   }{\f1 GOOSE }{\b\f1 v\'e1n}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 w\'e1n }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\f1 v\'e1ni }{\i\f1 is given, but seems perfectly regular) -WA-N-
\par   }{\f1 GORE }{\b\f1 nasta }{\f1 (spearhead, point, triangle), }{\b\f1 neht\'eb }{\f1 (spearhead, narrow promontory, wedge), }{\b\f1 mear }{\i\f1 (from a root possibly meaning "ooze") -SNAS, UT:282, LT1:260
\par   }{\f1 GORGE }{\b\f1 cilya }{\f1 (pass between hills, cleft)}{\i\f1  (so in Etym, but cf. }{\b\i\f1 #cirya }{\i\f1 in the name }{\b\i\f1 Calacirya }{\i\f1 "Pass of Light" [gen. }{\b\i\f1 Calaciryo }{\i\f1 in Nam\'e1ri\'eb] - though this clashes with }{
\b\i\f1 cirya }{\i\f1 "ship". An early version of Nam\'e1ri\'eb actually had }{\b\i\f1 Calacilyo}{\i\f1 ,}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 not }{\b\i\f1 Calaciryo}{\i\f1 ; see }{\f1 An Introduction to Elvish}{\i\f1  p. 5) -KIL 
\par }{\f1   GORTHAUR }{\b\f1 Sauron}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -Silm:418 cf. THUS
\par   }{\f1 GOTHMOG }{\b\f1 Cosomot}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (prob. *}{\b\i\f1 Cosomoc-}{\i\f1 , cf the alternative form }{\b\i\f1 Cosomoco}{\i\f1 )}{\f1  -}{\i\f1 LT1:258   }{\f1  }{\i\f1 
\par   }{\f1 GOVERN }{\b\f1 turin }{\i\f1 ("I...govern", 1st pers. aorist)}{\f1 , pa.t. }{\b\f1 turn\'eb}{\i\f1  }{\f1 (wield, control).}{\i\f1  LT1:273 has }{\b\i\f1 vard- }{\i\f1 "rule, govern", but this is hardly a valid word in LotR-style Quenya.}{\f1  }{
\i\f1 -TUR
\par   }{\f1 GOVERNANCE }{\b\f1 heren }{\f1 (fortune) }{\i\f1 -KHER
\par   }{\f1 GOVERNOR }{\b\f1 c\'e1no}{\f1  (see COMMANDER),}{\i\f1  }{\f1 (governor, chieftain, commander) }{\i\f1 -PM:345
\par   }{\f1 GRADE }{\b\f1 #tyell\'eb }{\i\f1 (only pl }{\b\i\f1 tyeller }{\i\f1 is attested - note irregular plural instead of the expected form **}{\b\i\f1 tyelli}{\i\f1 ) -LotR:1153}{\f1 
\par   GRAMMAR }{\b\f1 tengwesta }{\f1 (system or code of signs) }{\i\f1 -TEK cf. WJ:394
\par   }{\f1 GRANDCHILD }{\b\f1 indyo }{\f1 (descendant) }{\i\f1 (}{\b\i\f1 Indyo }{\i\f1 looks like Vanyarin Quenya; the combination }{\b\i\f1 ndy }{\i\f1 became }{\b\i\f1 ny }{\i\f1 in Noldorin Quenya [see MIDDLE]. The Noldor likely used the form }{\b\i\f1 
*inyo}{\i\f1 .) 
\par -\'d1GYO(N)                 
\par   }{\f1 GRANT }{\b\f1 lav- }{\f1 (yield, allow) }{\i\f1 -DAB
\par   }{\f1 GRASP }{\b\f1 mapa- }{\f1 (seize) }{\i\f1 This word was struck out in one of Tolkien's earlier word-lists, but in Etym it was restored. -MAP, LT2:339   
\par   }{\f1 GRASS }{\b\f1 salqu\'eb}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 (stiff and dry:) }{\b\f1 sara }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (bent) }{\i\f1 -SALAK, STAR
\par   }{\f1 GREAT }{\b\f1 velic\'eb }{\i\f1 (possibly obsolete in LotR-style Quenya: In LT1:254 }{\b\i\f1 velic\'eb }{\i\f1 is said to correspond to Gnomish }{\b\i\f1 beleg}{\i\f1 , but according to LR:352 the stem from which }{\b\i\f1 beleg }{\i\f1 
is derived is "not found in Q[uenya]").}{\f1  GREAT }{\i\f1 (in size) }{\b\f1 alta}{\f1  (large) }{\i\f1 (The form }{\b\i\f1 alat- }{\i\f1 is used in compounds when the next word has an initial vowel, as in }{\b\i\f1 Alatair\'eb}{\i\f1 
. Tolkien's gloss of }{\b\i\f1 alta}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 alat- }{\i\f1 was actually illegible, and I give the root meaning of the stem \'c1LAT. The meaning of the Quenya word cannot differ too widely from it, for }{\b\i\f1 Alatair\'eb}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 
is said to correspond to "Noldorin" }{\b\i\f1 Belegoer }{\i\f1 [in LotR-style Sindarin }{\b\i\f1 Belegaer}{\i\f1 ], The Great Sea.) -LT1:254, \'c1LAT cf. BEL, cf. Silm:428
\par   }{\f1 GREAT BEAR }{\i\f1 see }{\f1 SICKLE OF THE VALAR.}{\i\f1 
\par   }{\f1 GREAT LONGING }{\b\f1 mavoin\'eb }{\i\f1 -LT2:345
\par   }{\f1 GREAT NUMBER }{\i\f1 - in a very great number:}{\f1  }{\b\f1 \'fav\'eba }{\f1 (abundance) }{\i\f1 -UB
\par   }{\f1 GREAT QUANTITY }{\b\f1 \'fav\'eb }{\i\f1 (abundance) -UB
\par   }{\f1 GREAT WOOD }{\b\f1 taur\'eb }{\i\f1 (forest) -TAWAR
\par   }{\f1 GREED }{\b\f1 milm\'eb}{\f1 ; GREEDY }{\b\f1 milca }{\i\f1 -MIL-IK}{\f1 
\par   GREEN }{\b\f1 laica}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (so in Letters:282; earlier sources have}{\f1  }{\b\i\f1 laiqua}{\i\f1 , whereas }{\b\i\f1 laica}{\i\f1  meant something wholly different ["keen, piercing"] in earlier material: LT2:337)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 wenya }{\f1 
(yellow-green, fresh), }{\b\f1 ezel}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ezella}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 (adopted from Valarin; only used in Vanyarin Quenya)}{\f1 ."}{\i\f1 Green" is expressed as a mere prefix }{\b\i\f1 lai}{\i\f1 - (representing the root underlying the adjective }{
\b\i\f1 laica}{\i\f1 ) in:}{\f1  GREEN-ELVES }{\b\f1 Laiquendi}{\f1 ; cf. also VERDIGRIS = }{\b\f1 lairus}{\f1 .}{\b\f1  }{\f1 GREENNESS }{\b\f1 w\'e9n}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 laiquass\'eb}{\f1  (freshness, youth). }{\i\f1 -L\'c1
YAK/LT1:267, WJ:399, GWEN, WJ:385, LT1:267
\par   }{\f1 GREY #}{\b\f1 mista}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 lassemista }{\i\f1 "leaf-grey")}{\f1 , also }{\b\f1 hiswa}{\f1 , but the most usual word for "grey" may be }{\b\f1 sind\'eb}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\f1 or }{\b\f1 sinda }{\f1 
(}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ).}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ has }{\b\i\f1 sind\'eb}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 "pale or silvery grey", wheras }{\b\i\f1 sinda }{\i\f1 is given in Silm:438; cf. also }{\b\i\f1 sindanoriello }{\i\f1 "from a grey land", }{\b\i\f1 Sindacollo }{\i\f1 
"Grey-cloak" and }{\b\i\f1 Sindar }{\i\f1 "Grey-Elves, *Grey Ones".)}{\f1 GREY-ELVES }{\b\f1 Sindar }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (sg. }{\b\f1 Sinda}{\f1 ), }{\i\f1 less commonly }{\b\i\f1 Sindeldi }{\i\f1 (sg }{\b\i\f1 Sindel}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
; GREY-CLOAK }{\b\f1 Sindacollo}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Singollo }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (so in Silm:421; MR:217 has }{\b\i\f1 Sindicollo}{\i\f1 , presupposing }{\b\i\f1 sind\'eb}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 sindi}{\i\f1 - as the word for "grey"); }{\f1 
GREY-ELVEN }{\b\f1 sindarinwa }{\i\f1 (adj)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Sindarin }{\i\f1 (= Grey-Elven language) }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -LotR:505 cf. Letters:224, KHIS, LotR:1171, Silm:438, THIN/WJ:384, Nam, Silm:419, WJ:384, LotR:1157, 1161
\par   }{\f1 GRIEF}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 ny\'e9r\'eb }{\f1 (sorrow). Pl. probably *}{\b\f1 ny\'e9rer }{\f1 not *}{\b\f1 ny\'e9ri}{\f1 ; cf. the similar formation }{\b\f1 ty\'e1v\'eb }{\f1 "taste" pl. }{\b\f1 ty\'e1ver}{\f1 . The noun }{\b\f1 ny\'e9r\'eb }{\f1 
points to a verbal stem *}{\b\f1 nyer}{\f1 - "grieve". }{\i\f1 -GL:60/LT1:261
\par }{\f1   GROT }{\i\f1 (small)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 rotto}{\f1  (tunnel) -}{\i\f1 PM:365
\par   }{\f1 GROUND }{\b\f1 talan }{\f1 (#}{\b\f1 talam}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 talami}{\f1 ) (floor) }{\i\f1 -TALAM
\par   }{\f1 GROW FAT }{\b\f1 tiuya- }{\i\f1 -TIW 
\par   }{\f1 GROWL }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 yarra- }{\f1 (snarl), }{\i\f1 (of dogs:) }{\b\f1 n\'faru-}{\f1  (grumble); GROWL }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 nur }{\f1 (complaint) 
\par }{\i\f1 -MC:223, LT1:263
\par   }{\f1 GRUMBLE }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 nurru- }{\f1 (murmur), }{\b\f1 n\'faru- }{\f1 (growl [of dogs]). }{\i\f1 (These may simply be two forms of the same word. }{\b\i\f1 Nurru- }{\i\f1 is by far the later [TLT] form.) }{\f1 GRUMBLING }{\i\f1 (adj) }{\b\f1 
nurrua }{\i\f1 -MC:223, LT1:263
\par   }{\f1 GUARD - }{\i\f1 use the word glossed "watch, heed", q.v. Cf. LT1:258. For "guard" as a noun, #}{\b\i\f1 tirno }{\i\f1 "watcher" may be isolated from }{\b\i\f1 halatirno }{\i\f1 (see FISHWATCHER)
\par   }{\f1 GUESS }{\i\f1 (vb)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 intya-}{\f1 ;}{\b\f1  }{\f1 GUESS }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 intya }{\i\f1 (supposition, idea)
\par   }{\f1 GULF }{\b\f1 y\'e1w\'eb}{\f1  (cleft, ravine), }{\b\f1 f\'e1s\'eb }{\f1 (gap) }{\i\f1 -YAG, GL:36
\par   }{\f1 GULL }{\b\f1 maiw\'eb }{\i\f1 -MIW         
\par   }{\f1 GYRATE }{\b\f1 hwinya- }{\f1 (eddy, swirl) }{\i\f1 -SWIN
\par 
\par }{\f1  }{\b\f1\fs24  <H>         
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 HABIT }{\b\f1 haim\'eb }{\i\f1 -KHIM             
\par   }{\f1 HABITATION }{\b\f1 imbar }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 Imbar}{\f1  was an Elvish name of the Earth as the prinicipal part of Arda; the form }{\b\f1 Ambar}{\f1  may be more usual and is found in LotR.) }{\i\f1 -MR:337, WJ:419, 402, LotR:1003 
\par   }{\f1 HAIL }{\b\f1 aiya }{\i\f1 (so in LotR; LT1:248 has }{\b\i\f1 \'e1y\'eb}{\i\f1 ) -LotR:747, 950 cf. Letters:385
\par   }{\f1 HAIR }{\b\f1 lox\'eb}{\f1 ; TANGLED HAIR }{\b\f1 fass\'eb}{\f1 ; LOCK OF HAIR }{\b\f1 find\'eb }{\i\f1 (defined as "a tress or plait of hair" in PM:345; LT2:341 has }{\b\i\f1 findl}{\i\f1 , an impossible form in LotR-style Quenya)}{\f1 
, HEAD OF HAIR, A PERSON'S HAIR AS A WHOLE }{\b\f1 findess\'eb}{\i\f1  -LOKH, PHAS, SPIN, PM:345
\par   }{\f1 HALF-ELVEN }{\i\f1 (noun, pl) }{\b\f1 Pereldar }{\i\f1 (Sindarin }{\b\i\f1 Peredhil}{\i\f1 , LotR:1071) -Letters:386
\par   }{\f1 HALL }{\b\f1 #mard\'eb }{\f1 (isolated from }{\b\f1 oromardi }{\f1 "lofty halls, high-halls"); ROCKHEWN HALL }{\b\f1 hr\'f3ta-}{\i\f1  }{\f1 (artificial cave, rockhewn hall), VAULTED HALL }{\b\f1 rondo}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -Nam}{\f1 /}{\i\f1 
RGEO:66, PM:365, VT39:9}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 HALLOW #}{\b\f1 airita}{\f1 - (only pa.t. }{\b\f1 airit\'e1n\'eb}{\f1  is attested) }{\i\f1 -VT32:7
\par   }{\f1 HALVE }{\b\f1 perya}{\f1 - (devide in middle) }{\i\f1 (After }{\b\i\f1 perya}{\i\f1 , a word }{\b\i\f1 perina }{\i\f1 is mentioned - it is undefined but seems to be a corresponding adjective or past participle *"halved, divided in middle".) -PER}{
\f1  }{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 
\par   }{\f1 HAMMER }{\i\f1 (vb)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 namba-}{\f1 ; HAMMER }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 namba }{\i\f1 -NDAM}{\f1 
\par   HAMS }{\b\f1 hacca }{\f1 (buttocks) }{\i\f1 -GL:47
\par   }{\f1 HAND }{\b\f1 m\'e1 }{\i\f1 (pl. allative }{\b\i\f1 mannar }{\i\f1 "into...hands" is attested; the long }{\b\i\f1 \'e1}{\i\f1  evidently becomes short }{\b\i\f1 a }{\i\f1 before a consonant cluster)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 qu\'e1r\'eb }{\i\f1 
(the latter is properly "fist", but was often used for "hand" - see FIST)}{\f1 ; HOLLOW OF HAND }{\b\f1 camb\'eb}{\f1 ; HAVING HANDS }{\b\f1 mavoit\'eb}{\f1 ; HANDY, HANDED }{\b\f1 mait\'eb }{\f1 (skilled) }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 maisi}{\i\f1 . When }{
\b\i\f1 mait\'eb}{\i\f1  is the final element of names, it is translated "handed" instead of "handy", e.g. }{\b\i\f1 Angamait\'eb }{\i\f1 "Iron-handed", }{\b\i\f1 morimait\'eb }{\i\f1 "blackhanded")}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -MA3/LT2:339/VT39:10, FS, KWAR/Si
lm:429, KAB, LotR:1085 cf. Letters:425, LotR:1015/SD:68, 72, UT:460
\par   }{\f1 HANDLE }{\b\f1 mahta- }{\f1 (fight, manage, wield, wield a weapon) }{\i\f1 -TUR, MAK, VT39:10, MA3 
\par   }{\f1 HANG }{\b\f1 linga- }{\f1 (dangle) }{\i\f1 -LING
\par   }{\f1 HAPPEN - }{\i\f1 LT2:348 gives }{\b\i\f1 mart- }{\i\f1 "it happens" (impersonal). Perhaps read *}{\b\i\f1 marta-}{\i\f1  in LotR-style Quenya, though that would clash with the adjective }{\b\i\f1 marta }{\i\f1 "fey, fated".
\par   }{\f1 HAPPY }{\b\f1 valin}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (LT1:272 also gives }{\b\i\f1 valimo}{\i\f1 , but adjectives ending in }{\b\i\f1 -o }{\i\f1 do not occur in LotR-style Quenya)}{\f1 , HAPPINESS }{\b\f1 vald- }{\i\f1 (so in LT1:272; nom. sg. must be either *}{
\b\i\f1 val }{\i\f1 or *}{\b\i\f1 vald\'eb}{\i\f1 ) }{\f1 (blessedness) }{\i\f1 It is highly questionable whether these words from LT1:272 are "valid" in LotR-style Quenya: Originally, they were meant to be related to the noun }{\b\i\f1 Valar}{\i\f1 
, the Gods being called the "Happy Ones", but Tolkien later re-interpreted }{\b\i\f1 Valar}{\i\f1  as meaning the "Powers". For "happiness" it may be better to use the noun }{\b\i\f1 alass\'eb}{\i\f1 
 "joy", and for "happy" or "joyful, joyous"  many writers have used the neologism *}{\b\i\f1 alass\'eba}{\i\f1 .}{\f1 
\par   HARBOUR }{\b\f1 h\'f3pa}{\f1  (haven, bay }{\i\f1 - obsoleting }{\b\i\f1 c\'f3pa}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 c\'f3pas }{\i\f1 in LT1:257}{\f1 ); HARBOURAGE }{\b\f1 hopass\'eb }{\i\f1 -KHOP
\par   }{\f1 HARD }{\b\f1 sarda}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 nauca }{\f1 (the latter also meaning ill-shapen, twisted, *small }{\i\f1 - see SMALL}{\f1 .) }{\i\f1 -VT39:17,}{\f1  }{\i\f1 WJ:413
\par   }{\f1 HARE }{\b\f1 lapatt\'eb }{\i\f1 -GL:52
\par   }{\f1 HARP }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 nanda}{\f1 -; HARP }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 nand\'eb}{\f1 ; LITTLE HARP }{\b\f1 nandell\'eb}{\f1 ; HARPING }{\i\f1 (noun, not adjectival participle) }{\b\f1 nandel\'eb}{\f1 ; HARPER }{\b\f1 nandaro}{\f1 , HARP-PLAYER }{
\b\f1 tyalangan}{\i\f1 . (In Etym, all but the last of these words are spelt with initial }{\b\i\f1 \'f1}{\i\f1 , that is, }{\b\i\f1 ng}{\i\f1 . Initial }{\b\i\f1 ng }{\i\f1 had become }{\b\i\f1 n }{\i\f1 
in Third Age Quenya, and I follow the system of LotR and transcribe it accordingly. But if these words are written in Tengwar, the initial }{\b\i\f1 n }{\i\f1 should be transcribed with the letter }{\b\i\f1 noldo}{\i\f1 , not }{\b\i\f1 n\'famen}{\i\f1 .) 
}{\f1 HARP-PLAYING }{\b\f1 salm\'eb}{\i\f1 . -NGAN, TYAL; cf. LotR:1157, LT1:265
\par }{\f1   HARSH }{\b\f1 naraca }{\f1 (rending, violent) }{\i\f1 -N\'c1RAK
\par   }{\f1 HARVEST }{\b\f1 y\'e1vi\'eb }{\f1 (autumn) - }{\i\f1 evidently obsoleting }{\b\i\f1 y\'e1van}{\i\f1  in LT1:273.}{\f1  }{\i\f1 In the Calendar of Imladris, }{\b\i\f1 y\'e1vi\'eb }{\i\f1 
was a precisely defined period of 52 days, but the word was also used without any exact definition. Note: }{\b\i\f1 y\'e1vi\'eb }{\i\f1 probably  refers to harvest }{\f1 time}{\i\f1 
 only, not "harvest" in the sense "harvested products", though it is derived from a stem meaning "fruit". -LotR:1142, 1145
\par   }{\f1 HASP }{\b\f1 tangwa }{\f1 (clasp) }{\i\f1 -TAK}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 HASTE }{\b\f1 orm\'eb }{\f1 (wrath, violence, rushing); HASTY }{\b\f1 orna}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tyelca }{\f1 (agile)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -GOR, KHOR, PM:353
\par }{\f1   HAT }{\b\f1 t\'e1ta}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -GL:71
\par   }{\f1 HATE }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\f1 #}{\b\f1 tev- }{\i\f1 (aorist }{\b\i\f1 tev\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 ; }{\i\f1 LT1:258 has }{\b\i\f1 mokir }{\i\f1 "I hate", read }{\b\i\f1 *mocin }{\i\f1 in LotR-style Quenya? }{\f1 HATEFUL }{\b\f1 sanc\'eb}{\f1 ; HATRED }{\b\f1 
tevi\'eb }{\i\f1 -LT1:268, LT2:341
\par   }{\f1 HAVE }{\b\f1 - }{\i\f1 see }{\f1 POSSESS. }{\i\f1 Cf also }{\f1 NO LONGER TO BE HAD }{\b\f1 vanwa }{\f1 (gone, dead, departed, lost, past, vanished) }{\i\f1 -WJ:366
\par }{\f1   HAVEN  }{\b\f1 h\'f3pa }{\f1 (harbour, bay) }{\b\f1 lond\'eb }{\i\f1 (as in }{\b\i\f1 Alqualond\'eb }{\i\f1 "Haven of the Swans", UT:417 - but elsewhere }{\b\i\f1 lond\'eb }{\i\f1 is glossed "entrance to harbour, road in sea")}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -KHOP

\par  }{\f1 ?HAWK }{\b\f1 fion }{\i\f1 (pl }{\b\f1 fioni}{\i\f1 , }{\b\f1 fiondi}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 
(Tolkien's gloss was "not certainly legible; the likeliest interpretation would be 'haste', but 'hawk' is a possibility." The translation "haste" is out of the question, as this word would have no plural form. Besides, a quite different word for "haste" [
}{\b\i\f1 orm\'eb}{\i\f1 ] is known.) -PHI
\par   }{\f1 HE \endash  }{\i\f1 in some early sources there appear a pronominal ending }{\b\f1 -ro}{\i\f1 , as in }{\b\f1 antav\'e1ro }{\f1 he will give}{\i\f1  (so in LR:63, perhaps *}{\b\i\f1 antuv\'e1ro }{\i\f1 in LotR-style Quenya). Th
ere is also the ending }{\b\i\f1 -s}{\i\f1 , that covers the entire 3rd person sg: "he, she, it". It is uncertain what the independent word for "he, even he" might be; some would guess that it could be *}{\b\i\f1 ery\'eb}{\i\f1 
. By the same theory, Tolkien may have abandoned -}{\b\i\f1 ro}{\i\f1  in favour of the ending *-}{\b\i\f1 ry\'eb}{\i\f1 , connecting with the ending -}{\b\i\f1 rya}{\i\f1  "his, her"; if so, *-}{\b\i\f1 ry\'eb}{\i\f1  (and *}{\b\i\f1 ery\'eb}{\i\f1 
) would also cover both "he" and "she" (whereas -}{\b\i\f1 ro}{\i\f1  as a distinct ending for "he" might have corresponded to *-}{\b\i\f1 r\'eb}{\i\f1  "she"; compare the references to ancient inflections in }{\f1 -so}{\i\f1  and }{\f1 -se}{\i\f1 
 found in the }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1 , entry S}{\f1 -).}{\i\f1  As an independent word for "he" LR:63 apparently has }{\b\i\f1 e}{\i\f1 , a word that appears in Sindarin as well (SD:129). Does it also cover "she, it"? Cf. HIM, HIS.
\par   }{\f1 HEAD }{\b\f1 c\'e1r}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 cas}{\f1 -), }{\b\f1 n\'f3la }{\f1 (round head, knoll); HEAD OF HAIR }{\b\f1 findess\'eb}{\i\f1  (see HAIR).}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -KAS, NDOL, PM:345
\par   }{\f1 HEAL #}{\b\f1 envinyata- }{\f1 (isolated from the past participle }{\b\f1 envinyanta}{\f1  "healed". The literal meanings are }{\b\f1 *}{\f1 "renew" and "renewed", cf. Aragorn's title }{\b\f1 Envinyatar }{\f1 "Renewer" [q.v.]) }{\i\f1 -MR:405

\par   }{\f1 HEAR #}{\b\f1 hlar- }{\i\f1 (only fut }{\b\i\f1 hlaruva }{\i\f1 is attested) -MC:222
\par   }{\f1 HEARING }{\i\f1 (adj)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 lasta }{\f1 (listening) }{\i\f1 -LAS}{\i\f1\fs12 2}{\i\f1 
\par   }{\f1 HEART }{\b\f1 h\'f3n }{\i\f1 (physical heart)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 \'f3r\'eb }{\f1 (inner mind - concerning this word, see SPIRIT) }{\i\f1 (Note: a homophone means "rising")}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 indo }{\f1 (mind, mood), }{\b\f1 enda}{\f1 
 (lit. "centre", not referring to the physical organ, but the }{\i\f1 f\'eba}{\f1  [soul] or }{\i\f1 s\'e1ma}{\f1  [mind] itself), }{\b\f1 elwen}{\f1 ; }{\i\f1 -}{\f1 HEARTED #}{\b\f1 honda}{\f1  (}{\i\f1 isolated from }{\b\i\f1 sincahonda }{\i\f1 
"flinthearted")}{\f1 .}{\i\f1  }{\f1  EYES OF HEARTSEASE }{\i\f1 (a name of the pansy) }{\b\f1 Helinyetill\'eb }{\f1 HEART OF FLAME }{\b\f1 Naira }{\i\f1 (a name of the Sun)}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 -KH\'d4-N-, LotR:1157, ID, VT39:32, LT1:255, LotR:1015 cf
. SD:68, 72, LT1:262, MR:198
\par   }{\f1 HEAT }{\b\f1 \'far\'eb }{\i\f1 (The stem from which this word must be derived was struck out in Etym, but the word occurs in LotR itself, indicating that Tolkien restored the stem in question.)}{\f1  SMOULDERING HEAT, RED [?HEAT] }{\i\f1 
(Tolkies handwriting was illegible) }{\b\f1 yulm\'eb }{\i\f1 (Note: 
\par a homophone means "drinking, carousal") -LotR:1157 cf. UR; YUL
\par   }{\f1 HEAVE #}{\b\f1 amorta- }{\i\f1 (only part. }{\b\i\f1 amortala }{\i\f1 is attested)}{\f1 , HEAVE }{\i\f1 (of large and heavy things:)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 r\'fama- }{\f1 (shift, move) }{\i\f1 (part. }{\b\f1 r\'famala }{\f1 is attested)}{\i\f1 
 -MC:222 cf. 215, MC:223, 222
\par   }{\f1 HEAVENS, THE }{\b\f1 menel }{\i\f1 (a sg word, "heaven", as opposed to its English translation)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ilw\'eb }{\f1 (sky). }{\i\f1 -Silm:434/MC:222 cf. 215, LT1:255
\par   }{\f1 HEAVY }{\b\f1 lunga }{\i\f1 -LUG
\par   }{\f1 HEDGE }{\i\f1 (jagged hedge of spikes) }{\b\f1 carax\'eb }{\i\f1 -KARAK
\par  }{\f1  HEED }{\b\f1 tirin }{\i\f1 ("I watch", *"I heed", 1st pers. aorist)}{\f1 , pa.t. }{\b\f1 tirn\'eb}{\f1 ; fut. }{\b\f1 tiruva }{\f1 "shall heed" is attested; also }{\b\f1 cim}{\f1 -.}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -MC:222 cf. 214, TIR, GL:39
\par   }{\f1 HEIGHT #}{\b\f1 t\'e1ri\'eb }{\i\f1 (only allative }{\b\i\f1 t\'e1rienna }{\i\f1 "to the height" is attested) -LotR:989 cf. Letters:308
\par   }{\f1 HEIR }{\b\f1 aryon }{\i\f1 (also }{\b\i\f1 haryon }{\i\f1 is glossed as "heir", but this gloss is paranthetic and "prince" is given as the primary meaning. }{\b\i\f1 Hildinyar }{\i\f1 
is translated "my heirs" in Aragorn's oath; it appears that this is actually a form of }{\b\i\f1 hildo }{\i\f1 "follower".)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -GAR (see 3AR), LotR:1003, 1004
\par   }{\f1 HELL }{\b\f1 Angamando }{\i\f1 ("Iron-prison", Morgoth's dungeon-fortress in the First Age. This is the form given in MR; Etym has }{\b\i\f1 Angamanda}{\i\f1 , LT1:249/252 has }{\b\i\f1 Angamandu}{\i\f1 /}{\b\i\f1 Angamandi }{\i\f1 or }{\b\i\f1 
Eremandu}{\i\f1  "Hells of Iron". In LT1:259, }{\b\i\f1 Mandos }{\i\f1 is glossed "hell", but Mandos was simply the halls of the dead and not a place of torture. GL:51 also has }{\b\i\f1 fatanyu}{\i\f1 .) -MR:350, MBAD 
\par   }{\f1 HELMET }{\b\f1 cassa }{\i\f1 -KAS
\par   }{\f1 HEM }{\b\f1 r\'edma }{\f1 (edge, border), HEM OF ROBE }{\b\f1 lappa}{\i\f1  }{\f1  }{\i\f1 -R\'ce}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 GL:52
\par   }{\f1 HER 1. }{\i\f1 (object form of }{\f1 she}{\i\f1 )}{\f1  }{\i\f1 - the ending -}{\b\i\f1 s}{\i\f1  (also covering "it, *him". }{\b\i\f1 Ut\'favienyes }{\i\f1 [LotR:1008] is translated "I have found it", but it could probably mean 
"I have found her/him" as well.) Case endings may be attached to }{\b\i\f1 se}{\i\f1 , e.g. dative }{\b\i\f1 *sen }{\i\f1 "for her". Probably there is no distinction of gender here either; see HIM. }{\f1 2. HER }{\i\f1 (genitive}{\f1 , = }{\i\f1 of her)}{
\f1  }{\b\f1 -rya }{\i\f1 (possessive suffix, e.g. }{\b\i\f1 aratarya }{\i\f1 "her sublimity" [WJ:369], }{\b\i\f1 m\'e1ryat }{\i\f1 
"her hands" [Nam].) This ending apparently covers the entire 3rd pers sg and may also translate as "his" or - it may be assumed - *"its".) -WJ:369
\par   }{\f1 HERO }{\b\f1 callo }{\f1 (noble man). }{\i\f1 LT1:268 also has }{\b\i\f1 mordo }{\i\f1 "warrior, hero", but in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 mordo }{\i\f1 means "obscurity, shadow, stain". -KAL
\par   }{\f1 HEW *}{\b\f1 pelehta}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (emended from the actual reading }{\b\i\f1 pelekta-}{\i\f1 , since Tolkien later decided that }{\b\i\f1 kt }{\i\f1 became }{\b\i\f1 ht }{\i\f1 in Quenya) -LT2:346}{\f1  
\par   HIDE #}{\b\f1 nurta}{\f1 - (verbal stem isolated from the verbal noun }{\b\f1 nurtal\'eb}{\f1  "hiding" in Silm:120), }{\b\f1 #lom- }{\i\f1 (LT1:255 gives }{\b\i\f1 lomir }{\i\f1 "I hide"; this would become }{\b\i\f1 *lomin }{\i\f1 in LotR-style Quenya)
}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 moru- }{\i\f1 -LT1:261
\par   }{\f1 HIDING }{\b\f1 nurtal\'eb}{\i\f1  -Silm:120
\par   }{\f1 HIDDEN }{\b\f1 muina }{\f1 (secret), }{\b\f1 halda }{\i\f1 (veiled, shadowed, shady)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 foina}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 furin}{\f1 /}{\b\f1 hurin }{\i\f1 (concealed)}{\f1 ; DARK OR HIDDEN }{\b\f1 tumna}{\f1  (low-lying, low, profound, deep) }{
\i\f1 -MUY, SKAL, LT2:340, LT1:271
\par   }{\f1 HIDEOUS CREATURE }{\b\f1 ulundo }{\f1 (deformed creature, monster) }{\i\f1 -\'daLUG
\par   }{\f1 HIGH }{\b\f1 t\'e1ra }{\f1 (lofty, tall), }{\b\f1 oro- }{\i\f1 (in compounds: }{\b\i\f1 oromardi }{\i\f1 "high-halls")}{\f1 .}{\i\f1  The element #}{\b\i\f1 Ar- }{\i\f1 in }{\b\i\f1 Arfanyarass\'eb }{\i\f1 
(a name of Taniquetil) is said to mean "high (i.e., noble, revered)"}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -WJ:417, Nam/RGEO:66, WJ:416
\par   }{\f1 HIGH ELVES }{\b\f1 Tarquendi}{\f1 ;}{\i\f1  }{\f1 HIGH-ELVES }{\b\f1 Tareldar }{\i\f1 -TA, MC:349
\par   }{\f1 HIGH ONES }{\b\f1 Aratar }{\i\f1 (sg #}{\b\i\f1 Arata}{\i\f1 , cf. PM:363). The Aratar are the mightiest of the Valar: Manw\'eb, Varda, Ulmo, Yavanna, Aul\'eb, Mandos, Nienna, and Orom\'eb. }{\b\i\f1 Aratar }{\i\f1 
is also rendered "The Supreme, Exalted Ones". -Silm 32/381, WJ:402  
\par   }{\f1 HIGH SPEECH }{\i\f1 (= Quenya)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 Tarquesta}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -T\'c2   
\par   }{\f1 HILL #}{\b\f1 ambo }{\i\f1 (only allative pl. }{\b\i\f1 ambonnar }{\i\f1 is attested); }{\b\f1 tundo }{\f1 (mound), }{\b\f1 oro}{\f1 ; }{\i\f1   }{\f1 ISOLATED ROUND HILL }{\b\f1 tolmen }{\f1 (boss of shield) }{\i\f1 -}{\f1 HILL-SIDE }{\b\f1 
amban }{\f1 (upward slope) }{\i\f1 (probably obsoleting }{\b\i\f1 amun(d) }{\i\f1 in LT2:335)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -MC:222, LT1:269, TUN, LT1:256, AM
\par   }{\f1 HIM }{\i\f1 - probably the ending -}{\b\i\f1 s}{\i\f1  (also covering "it, *her". }{\b\i\f1 Ut\'favienyes }{\i\f1 [LotR:1008] is translated "I have found it", but it could probably mean "I have found him/her" as well.) Some theorize that }{
\b\i\f1 so}{\i\f1  may function as a short independent pronoun "he, him" and that case endings may be attached to this word, e.g. dative *}{\b\i\f1 son}{\i\f1  "for him". However, material recently published may suggest that in later variants of Quenya, }
{\b\i\f1 se}{\i\f1  covers both "he/she" and "him/her" (as object), and that this is the form to which case endings are attached (e.g. dative *}{\b\i\f1 sen}{\i\f1  "for him/her").
\par   }{\f1 HINDMOST }{\b\f1 tella }{\f1 (last); THE HINDMOST }{\b\f1 Teleri }{\i\f1 (the Last-comers)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -TELES, Silm:421
\par   }{\f1 HIS }{\b\f1 -rya }{\i\f1 (possessive suffix, e.g. }{\b\i\f1 coarya }{\i\f1 his house. This ending covers the entire 3rd pers sg and also means "her" and *"its".) -WJ:369
\par   }{\f1 HISTORY }{\b\f1 ny\'e1r\'eb }{\f1 (tale, saga), }{\b\f1 quenta}{\f1  (narrative, story), }{\b\f1 quental\'eb }{\f1 (account, narration), }{\b\f1 l\'famequental\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 l\'famequenta }{\f1 (chronological account), HISTORICAL }{\b\f1 l
\'famequental\'eba}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (In VT39:16,}{\b\i\f1  quental\'eb}{\i\f1  is defined as "narration" or "History", used as an abstract referring to universal History, but also used with particular reference; hence "the history of the Noldor" can be }{
\b\i\f1 quental\'eb Noldoron}{\i\f1  or }{\b\i\f1 quental\'eb Noldorinwa}{\i\f1 , but this refers to the real events rather than an account of them: that part of universal History which concerned the Noldor.) }{\f1 HISTORICAL ACCOUNT }{\b\f1 quentasta}{
\f1  }{\i\f1 (any particular arrangement, by some author, of a series of reconds or evidences into a given historical account - not History as such, which is }{\b\i\f1 quental\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -NAR}{\i\f1\fs12 2}{\b\i\f1\fs12  }{\i\f1 
, KWET/VT39:16, LU
\par }{\f1   HIVE }{\b\f1 nierwes }{\i\f1 -LT1:262
\par   }{\f1 HOARD }{\b\f1 foa }{\f1 (treasure) }{\i\f1 -LT2:340
\par   }{\f1 HOLE }{\b\f1 latta }{\f1 (pit - }{\i\f1 Note: a homophone means "strap"}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 assa }{\f1 (perforation, opening, mouth) }{\i\f1 -DAT, GAS}{\f1 
\par   HOLLOW }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 unqu\'eb}{\f1 , HOLLOW }{\i\f1 (adj) }{\b\f1 unqua}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ronta}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 rotwa}{\f1 ; HOLLOW OUT }{\b\f1 unca-}{\f1  
\par }{\i\f1 -UNUK, LotR:1157, LT2:347}{\b\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 HOLLOWBOLD }{\b\f1 N\'e1varot }{\f1 (Nogrod, Novrod) }{\i\f1 -WJ:389
\par }{\b\f1   }{\f1 HOLLY }{\b\f1 ercass\'eb }{\i\f1 (probably obsoleting }{\b\i\f1 piosenna }{\i\f1 in LT2:347) -ER\'c9K}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 HOLY }{\b\f1 aina}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 air\'eb}{\f1 ; HOLY ONE }{\b\f1 ainu}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (m.)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 aini }{\i\f1 (f.)}{\f1  (angelic spirit, god); HOLY PLACE }{\b\f1 y\'e1na}{\f1  (fane, sanctuary) }{\i\f1 -AYAN/WJ:399, Nam, YAN
\par   }{\f1 HOLYDAY }{\b\f1 meryal\'eb }{\i\f1 -MBER
\par   }{\f1 HOME }{\b\f1 m\'e1r }{\i\f1 (also used of the "home" or native land of peoples)}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 Short form }{\b\i\f1 mar }{\i\f1 as the final element of compounds: }{\b\i\f1 Eldamar }{\i\f1 "Elvenhome"; the vowel is also short in }{\b\i\f1 
Mar-nu-falmar}{\i\f1 , "the Land [lit. Home] under the Waves". -Silm:408, 428
\par   }{\f1 HOMESTEAD }{\b\f1 osta }{\i\f1 -LT2:336
\par   }{\f1 HONEY }{\b\f1 lis }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 liss-}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (LT1:262 gives }{\b\i\f1 nekt\'eb }{\i\f1 [read }{\b\i\f1 *neht\'eb}{\i\f1  in LotR-style Quenya].) }{\f1 HONEY-BEE }{\b\f1 nier}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 nion }{\i\f1 -LIS, LT1:262/GL:60
\par   }{\f1 HOOD }{\b\f1 telm\'eb }{\f1 (covering) }{\i\f1 -TEL
\par   }{\f1 HOOK }{\b\f1 ampa}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 atsa }{\f1 (claw, catch); HOOKED }{\b\f1 rempa }{\f1 (crooked) }{\i\f1 -LotR:1157, GAT, REP
\par   }{\f1 HOPE }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 estel }{\i\f1 -WJ:318 (where it is stated that this word was used in Quenya as well as in Sindarin. Here the word is defined as "'hope', sc. a temper of mind, steady, fixed in purpose, and difficult to dis
suade and unlikely to fall into despair or abandon its purpose". In MR:320, }{\b\i\f1 estel }{\i\f1 is translated "trust".)  
\par   }{\f1 HORDE }{\b\f1 horma}{\f1  (host) }{\i\f1 -LT2:341 
\par   }{\f1 HORN }{\b\f1 rass\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("especially on living animal, but also applied to mountains". Cf. }{\b\i\f1 Rasmund }{\i\f1 "horned bull" in Letters:423 [this may not be pure Quenya] and }{\b\i\f1 Arfanyaras}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 Arfanyarass\'eb
 }{\i\f1 "high white-shining peak [*horn]", alternative name of Taniquetil)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 romba }{\i\f1 (so in Etym and one place in WJ [p. 400: }{\b\i\f1 romba }{\i\f1 = "horn, trumpet"] but on p. 368 }{\b\i\f1 r\'f3ma}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 
is used for "horn", though this is glossed "trumpet-sound" in Etym)}{\f1 , HORN OF ULMO }{\b\f1 hyalma}{\f1  (shell, conch), }{\b\f1 tild\'eb }{\f1 (point), }{\i\f1 (horn of animal:) }{\b\f1 tarca }{\i\f1 (probably obsoleting }{\b\i\f1 taru }{\i\f1 
in LT2)}{\f1 ; HORNED }{\b\f1 tarucca }{\i\f1 (perhaps obsoleted together with }{\b\i\f1 taru}{\i\f1 ),}{\f1  THE HORNED }{\b\f1 Tilion }{\i\f1 (a name of the Moon)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -RAS, WJ:403/416, ROM/WJ:401 contrast 368, SYAL, TIL, TAR\'c1
K, LT2:337,347, Silm:438
\par   }{\f1 HORROR }{\i\f1 - }{\b\i\f1 rucin }{\i\f1 is glossed "I feel fear or horror" (1st pers. aorist), constructed with "from" of the object feared (e.g. *}{\b\i\f1 rucin Orcollon }{\i\f1 "I fear Orcs") -WJ:415
\par   }{\f1 HORSE }{\b\f1 rocco }{\i\f1 (defined as "swift horse for riding" in Letters:382)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 mairo}{\f1 ; HORSEMAN }{\b\f1 roquen }{\f1 (rider, knight)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -ROK/Letters:282, 382, GL:56, WJ:372/UT:282
\par   }{\f1 HOST }{\b\f1 rimb\'eb }{\f1 (crowd), }{\b\f1 horma }{\f1 (horde) }{\i\f1 -RIM/Letters:178, 382, LT2:341
\par   }{\f1 HOSTILE }{\b\f1 cotya }{\i\f1 -KOT
\par   }{\f1 HOT }{\b\f1 saiwa}{\f1 ; BLAZING HOT }{\b\f1 \'farin }{\i\f1 (}{\b\i\f1 \'darin }{\i\f1 is also a name of the Sun)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -LT1:248/265, LT1:271
\par   }{\f1 HOUND }{\b\f1 huan }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 h\'fan-}{\f1 ); HOUND OF CHASE }{\b\f1 ronyo }{\i\f1 -KHUG (see KHUGAN), ROY
\par   }{\f1 HOUR }{\b\f1 l\'fam\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (so translated in LotR; in Etym the gloss is simply "time". Allative }{\b\i\f1 l\'famenna }{\i\f1 is attested. Note: }{\b\i\f1 l\'fam\'eb }{\i\f1 also means "darkness".) -LU, LotR:94, WJ:367
\par  }{\b\f1  }{\f1 HOUSE }{\b\f1 coa }{\i\f1 (prob. the most neutral word)}{\f1 ,}{\b\f1  opel\'eb}{\f1  (walled house), }{\b\f1 car }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 card-}{\f1 ) (building), }{\b\f1 noss\'eb }{\f1 (clan, family, kin, people) }{\i\f1 (LT2:336 gives }{\b\i\f1 
indo }{\i\f1 "house" and }{\b\i\f1 os(t) }{\i\f1 "house and cottage"; these words are probably obsolete - in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 indo }{\i\f1 means "heart", while }{\b\i\f1 osto}{\i\f1  means "city". Also }{\b\i\f1 indor }{\i\f1 
"master of house" must be obsolete.) }{\f1 LIGHT OF THE HOUSE }{\b\f1 coacalina }{\i\f1 (a metaphor for the soul [}{\b\i\f1 f\'eba}{\i\f1 ] dwelling inside the body [}{\b\i\f1 hroa}{\i\f1 ]) -WJ:369/MR:250, PEL(ES), KAR, N\'d4/LT1:250, 343, MR:250   }{
\f1  
\par   HOW }{\b\f1 manen}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -PM:395
\par }{\f1   HUMAN }{\b\f1 firya }{\i\f1 (lit. *"mortal"; nominal pl. }{\b\i\f1 Firyar }{\i\f1 is attested) -PHIR, WJ:219
\par   }{\f1 HUMBLED }{\b\f1 nucumna }{\f1 -}{\i\f1 SD:246
\par   }{\f1 HUMP }{\b\f1 tumpo}{\f1 ; HUMPBACK }{\b\f1 cauco}{\f1 , HUMPED }{\b\f1 cauca }{\f1 (bent, crooked)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -TUMPU, LT1:257}{\f1 
\par   HUNGRY }{\b\f1 maita}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -VT39:11
\par   }{\f1 HUNT }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1 , HUNTING }{\b\f1 raim\'eb }{\i\f1 (which is evidently a misreading for *}{\b\i\f1 roim\'eb}{\i\f1  in Tolkien's manuscript. No verb "to hunt" is given in Etym, but }{\b\i\f1 roita-}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 
"pursue" is derived from the same stem and can probably be translated *"hunt" as well. LT1:260 has }{\b\i\f1 rauta- }{\i\f1 "hunt".) -ROY}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1  
\par   }{\f1 HUSBAND }{\b\f1 verno}{\f1 ; HUSBAND AND WIFE }{\b\f1 veru }{\f1 (married pair) }{\i\f1 -BES
\par   }{\f1 HUSH }{\b\f1 quild\'eb }{\f1 (rest, quiet) }{\i\f1 -GL:23
\par  \tab 
\par }{\b\f1\fs24   <I>}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 I }{\i\f1 (1st pers. sg) }{\b\f1 iny\'eb }{\i\f1 (independent pronoun, used for emphasis: *"even I")}{\f1 , -}{\b\f1 n}{\f1  }{\i\f1 or}{\f1  }{\b\f1 -ny\'eb }{\i\f1 (endings used on verbs, e.g. }{\b\i\f1 \'e1van}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 v\'e1ny\'eb }{
\i\f1 "I [-}{\b\i\f1 n}{\i\f1 /-}{\b\i\f1 ny\'eb}{\i\f1 ] will not", }{\b\i\f1 maruvan }{\i\f1 "I [}{\b\i\f1 -n}{\i\f1 ] will abide")}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 The long form }{\b\i\f1 -nye }{\i\f1 must be used if another pronominal ending is to be added after it: }{
\b\i\f1 ut\'favienyes}{\i\f1 , "I [}{\b\i\f1 -nye-}{\i\f1 ] have found it [-}{\b\i\f1 s}{\i\f1 ]". In the "Arctic" sentence, }{\b\i\f1 ni }{\i\f1 is translated "I"; this may be a shorter (non-emphatic?) form of }{\b\i\f1 iny\'eb}{\i\f1 
. The dative pronoun }{\b\i\f1 nin }{\i\f1 "for me" is transparently }{\b\i\f1 ni }{\i\f1 + the dative ending -}{\b\i\f1 n}{\i\f1 ; other case endings may also be added to }{\b\i\f1 ni}{\i\f1 . -LR:61, WJ:371, LotR:1008/1003, Arct
\par   }{\f1 ICE }{\b\f1 helc\'eb}{\f1 ;}{\b\i\f1  }{\f1 ICE-COLD }{\b\f1 helca }{\i\f1 (so in LT1:254 and Silm; Etym has }{\b\i\f1 helc}{\i\f1 , evidently a misprint - it would be the only Quenya word ending in -}{\b\i\f1 lc }{\i\f1 
in the entire corpus.) -LT1:254/Silm:433/KHEL
\par   }{\f1 IDEA }{\b\f1 intya }{\f1 (guess, suppostition), *}{\b\f1 selma }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 ("a fixed idea, will". In WJ:319, the word is given as }{\b\i\f1 \'deelma}{\i\f1 , but }{\b\i\f1 \'de}{\i\f1  (}{\b\i\f1 th}{\i\f1 )}{\b\i\f1  }{
\i\f1 would become }{\b\i\f1 s }{\i\f1 in the Noldorin Quenya. Cf. }{\b\i\f1 \'deind\'eb}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 sind\'eb }{\i\f1 in WJ:384; see GREY)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -INK, WJ:319
\par   }{\f1 IDOL }{\b\f1 cordon }{\i\f1 -LT1:257
\par }{\f1   IDRIL }{\b\f1 Itaril}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Itarill\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Itarild\'eb }{\i\f1 (obsoleting }{\b\i\f1 Irild\'eb }{\i\f1 in LT2) }{\f1 -}{\i\f1 PM:346}{\f1 /}{\i\f1 Silm:436, LT2:343
\par   }{\f1 IF ANYBODY }{\b\f1 aiquen }{\f1 (whoever) }{\i\f1 -WJ:372
\par   }{\f1 ILL }{\b\f1 laiwa }{\f1 (sick, sickly) }{\i\f1 -SLIW
\par   }{\f1 ILL-SHAPEN }{\b\f1 nauca }{\f1 (hard, twisted, *small }{\i\f1 - see SMALL}{\f1 .) }{\i\f1 -WJ:413
\par  }{\f1  ILLUMINATE }{\b\f1 calya- }{\i\f1 -KAL
\par   }{\f1 IMAGINATION }{\b\f1 naus\'eb }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -NOWO
\par   }{\f1 IMMORTAL }{\b\f1 ilfirin }{\i\f1 -PHIR       
\par  }{\f1  IMMOVEABLE }{\b\f1 tulca }{\f1 (firm, strong, steadfast; }{\i\f1 Note:}{\f1  }{\i\f1 there is a homophone meaning "fix, set up, establish"}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 -TULUK cf. LT1:270
\par   }{\f1 IMPLEMENT (prob. noun) }{\b\f1 yaima }{\i\f1 -GL:37}{\f1 
\par   IMPEDED }{\b\f1 tapta}{\f1 ; nominal pl. }{\b\f1 taptar}{\f1  was used = }{\b\f1 tapta tengwi}{\f1  "impeded elements", a term for }{\i\f1 consonants}{\f1  (sg. #}{\b\f1 tapta tengw\'eb}{\f1 ; in the pl. we would rather expect *}{\b\f1 tapt\'eb tengwi}{
\f1  with the pl. form of the adjective). }{\i\f1 -VT39:17}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 IMPOSSIBLE TO RECOUNT }{\b\f1 \'fany\'e1rima}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("sc. because all the facts are not known, or the tale is too long")}{\f1 ,}{\i\f1  }{\f1 IMPOSSIBLE TO SAY/PUT INTO WORDS }{\b\f1 \'faqu\'e9tima }{\f1 
(unpronounceable, unspeakable), A THING IMPOSSIBLE TO BE OR TO BE DONE }{\b\f1 \'fanat}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -WJ:370, VT39:26
\par }{\f1   IMPULSE }{\b\f1 felm\'eb}{\f1  (emotion), }{\b\f1 h\'f3r\'eb}{\f1 ; BODY-IMPULSE }{\b\f1 hroafelm\'eb}{\f1  (impulses provided by the body, e.g. physical fear, hunger, thirst, sexual desire), SPIRIT-IMPULSE }{\b\f1 f\'ebafelm\'eb}{\f1 
 (impulses originating with the spirit, e.g. love, pity, anger, hate); IMPULSION }{\b\f1 h\'f3r\'eba }{\i\f1 -KHOR, VT41:19 cf. 13
\par   }{\f1 IN }{\b\f1 mi }{\f1 (within), IN THE }{\b\f1 m\'ed }{\i\f1 (for }{\b\i\f1 *mi i}{\i\f1 ?) (The version of Nam in LotR has }{\b\i\f1 mi }{\i\f1 where the version in RGEO has the more correct form }{\b\i\f1 m\'ed}{\i\f1 .) -MI, Nam, RGEO:66}{\f1 

\par   IN- }{\i\f1 (prefix denying presence or possession of thing or quality)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 \'fa}{\f1 - (not-, un-) }{\i\f1 -VT39:14; according to LR:396 s.v. UGU, this prefix usually has a "bad sense", cf. }{\b\i\f1 vanimor}{\i\f1  "fair folk" vs. }{\b\i\f1 
\'favanimor}{\i\f1  "monsters"}{\f1 .
\par   INADEQUATE }{\b\f1 penya}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 peny\'eb}{\i\f1  is attested)}{\f1  (lacking). INADEQUATE SIGN #}{\b\f1 penya tengwe}{\f1  (only pl. }{\b\f1 peny\'eb tengwi}{\f1 
 is attested). This term, also translated "lacking signs", was used in early Elvish analysis of Quenya as the term for vowels with no preceding consonant, held (in many cases incorrectly) to have lost such a consonant. -}{\i\f1 VT39:6, 8}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 IN A VERY GREAT NUMBER }{\b\f1 \'fav\'eba }{\f1 (abundant) }{\i\f1 -UB
\par   }{\f1 INCARNATE }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 #mirroanw\'eb }{\i\f1 (only pl. }{\b\i\f1 mirroanwi}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 "incarnates" is attested) -MR:350
\par   }{\f1 INCITEMENT}{\b\f1  siul\'eb }{\i\f1 -SIW
\par   }{\f1 INCLINE }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 talta }{\i\f1 -TAL\'c1T
\par   }{\f1 INCLINED }{\b\f1 penda }{\i\f1 (sloping down) -PEN
\par   }{\f1 INDICATE }{\b\f1 tana- }{\f1 (show) }{\i\f1 (Note: }{\b\i\f1 tana }{\i\f1 also means "that")}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 t\'eba}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (note: not to be confused with the noun }{\b\i\f1 t\'eba}{\i\f1  "straight line, road")}{\f1 ;}{\i\f1  }{\f1 
INDICATION }{\b\f1 tengw\'eb }{\f1 (sign, token, writing - }{\i\f1 pl }{\b\i\f1 tengwi }{\i\f1 is attested}{\f1 ) INDICATED }{\i\f1 (adj)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 teng\'eb}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 -MR:385, VT39:6, WJ:394, 395 cf. TEK, VT39:6
\par   }{\f1 INLANDS }{\b\f1 Mittalmar }{\i\f1 (the central region of N\'famenor) -UT:165, 454
\par   }{\f1 INNER MIND }{\b\f1 \'f3r\'eb }{\f1 (heart) }{\i\f1 (Note: a homophone means "rising")}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -LotR:1157
\par   }{\f1 INSIDE, TO THE }{\b\f1 mir}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 minna }{\f1 (into) -}{\i\f1 MI}{\f1 
\par   INSIGHT }{\b\f1 tercen}{\f1 ; OF INSIGHT, }{\i\f1 lit *}{\f1 INSIGHTFUL #}{\b\f1 tercenya }{\i\f1 (only pl }{\b\i\f1 terceny\'eb}{\i\f1  is attested) -MR:230}{\f1 
\par   INTELLECT }{\b\f1 handel\'eb}{\f1 ; INTELLIGENCE }{\b\f1 handass\'eb}{\f1 ; INTELLIGENT }{\b\f1 handa }{\f1 (understanding) }{\i\f1 -KHAN}{\f1 
\par   INTERCHANGE OF THOUGHT }{\i\f1 (= telepathy)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 \'f3sanw\'eb}{\f1  (communication of thought). -}{\i\f1 VT39:26
\par }{\f1   INTERIOR }{\i\f1 (adj) }{\b\f1 mitya }{\i\f1 -MI
\par   }{\f1 INVENT }{\b\f1 auta}{\f1 - (devise, originate) }{\i\f1 (Note: a homophone means "pass")}{\f1 ; INVENTION }{\b\f1 aul\'eb 
\par }{\i\f1 -GAWA}{\b\f1  
\par   }{\f1 INZILAD\'dbN }{\b\f1 Palantir}{\i\f1  -UT:223, Silm:324}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 IRELAND }{\b\f1 \'cdverind- }{\i\f1 (As indicated by the hyphen, some ending is needed - a Quenya word cannot end in }{\b\i\f1 nd}{\i\f1 . The normal form must be *}{\b\i\f1 \'cdverin}{\i\f1 , becoming }{\b\i\f1 \'cdverind(e)- }{\i\f1 
before an ending, e.g. genitive *}{\b\i\f1 \'cdverindo}{\i\f1 , locative *}{\b\i\f1 \'cdverindess\'eb}{\i\f1  [cf. }{\b\i\f1 L\'f3rien}{\i\f1 , locative }{\b\i\f1 L\'f3riendess\'eb}{\i\f1 ]. The name is also given as }{\b\i\f1 \'cdwerin }{\i\f1 or }{
\b\i\f1 Iverindor}{\i\f1 , "an island off the west coast of Tol Eress\'eba" - Eress\'eba later becoming England in this early version of Tolkien's mythology.) -LT2:344, cf 285
\par   }{\f1 IRON }{\b\f1 anga}{\f1 , IRON }{\i\f1 or}{\f1  STEEL }{\b\f1 er\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 eren}{\f1 ; OF IRON }{\b\f1 angaina}{\f1 ; IRON-HANDED }{\b\f1 Angamait\'eb}{\f1 ; IRON-GAOL }{\b\f1 Angamando }{\f1 (Angband)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -ANG\'c2
/LotR:1157, LT1:252, LT1:249, 268, Letters:425 cf. LotR:1085, MR:350
\par   }{\f1 \'cdRITH}{\b\f1  Iriss\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -PM:345
\par   }{\f1 IS }{\i\f1 see }{\f1 BE}{\i\f1 
\par   }{\f1 ISLAND, ISLE }{\b\f1 l\'f3na}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tol }{\i\f1 (pl }{\b\i\f1 toll\'eb }{\i\f1 according to Etym, }{\b\i\f1 tolli }{\i\f1 in LT1:85. According to Silm:438, }{\b\i\f1 tol }{\i\f1 
is used of islands "rising with sheer sides from the sea or from a river". LT1:269 defines a }{\b\i\f1 tol }{\i\f1 as "any rise standing alone in water, plain of green, etc.")}{\f1  THE LONELY ISLE }{\b\f1 Tol Eress\'eba }{\i\f1 (}{\b\i\f1 tol }{\i\f1 
"isle" often being omitted) -LONO, TOL, RGEO:70
\par   }{\f1 ISOLATED ROUND HILL }{\b\f1 tolmen }{\f1 (boss of shield) }{\i\f1 -LT1:269
\par   }{\f1 ISOLATED TOWER }{\b\f1 mindo }{\i\f1 -MINI
\par   }{\f1 ISOLATED TREE }{\b\f1 orn\'eb }{\i\f1 -\'d3R-NI- (see ORO)
\par   }{\f1 ISSUE }{\b\f1 usw\'eb }{\f1 (escape) }{\i\f1 -LT1:251
\par   }{\f1 ISSUE OF WATER }{\b\f1 ehtel\'eb }{\f1 (fountain, spring) }{\i\f1 -KEL
\par   }{\f1 ISTHMUS }{\b\f1 yanw\'eb }{\f1 (bridge, joining) }{\i\f1 -YAT
\par   }{\f1 IT }{\b\f1 ta }{\f1 (that), }{\b\f1 -s }{\i\f1 (pronominal ending, e.g. }{\b\i\f1 ut\'favienyes}{\i\f1 , "I have found [}{\b\i\f1 ut\'favienye-}{\i\f1 ] it [}{\b\f1 -s}{\i\f1 ]") It is uncertain what
 the independent word "it, even it" might be; see HE. *}{\f1 ITS }{\b\f1 -rya }{\i\f1 
(possessive suffix, only attested with the meanings "his" and "her" [q.v.], but related forms suggest that this ending covers the entire 3rd pers. sg.) -TA, LotR:1008, WJ:369
\par   
\par }{\b\f1\fs24   <J>
\par   }{\f1  JACKET }{\b\f1 vacco}{\f1  (cloak) -}{\i\f1 GL:21}{\f1 
\par    JAIL }{\i\f1 see GAOL     }{\f1  
\par    JANUARY }{\b\f1 Narviny\'eb }{\i\f1 (In LT1:252, the word for January is }{\b\i\f1 avestalis}{\i\f1 , and the latter part of the month is called }{\b\i\f1 Erintion}{\i\f1 , but these words are hardly conceptually valid in LotR-style Quenya.) -LotR:1144
}{\f1 
\par    JAW }{\b\f1 anca }{\i\f1 (translated "jaws" in the appendices to LotR and Silm, but }{\b\i\f1 anca }{\i\f1 is sg and is glossed "jaw" in Etym. GL:37 has }{\b\i\f1 c\'e1}{\i\f1  [spelt "k\'e2"])}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -LotR:1157, Silm:427, \'c1NAK
\par   }{\f1 JERK }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 rihta- }{\f1 (give quick twist or move) }{\i\f1 -RIK(H)
\par   }{\f1 JEWEL }{\b\f1 m\'edr\'eb }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 m\'edri }{\i\f1 is attested)}{\f1 ; SHINING JEWEL }{\b\f1 miril}{\f1  (treasure, precious thing) WITH ADORNMENT OF RED JEWELS }{\b\f1 carnim\'edri\'eb }{\i\f1 (a pl form? Sg *}{\b\i\f1 carnim\'edr
\'eba}{\i\f1 ? Letters:224 has }{\b\i\f1 carne- }{\i\f1 instead of }{\b\i\f1 carni-}{\i\f1 .) }{\f1 JEWEL OF YAVANNA }{\b\f1 yavannam\'edr\'eb }{\i\f1 (a flagrant evergreen tree with scarlet fruit, brought to N\'famenor by the Elda
r) -MIR/Silm:434, Nam, LotR:505 cf. Letters:224, UT:472
\par   }{\f1 JOINING }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 yanw\'eb }{\f1 (isthmus, bridge) }{\i\f1 -YAT
\par   }{\f1 JOY }{\b\f1 alass\'eb }{\f1 (merriment) }{\i\f1 -GAL\'c1S
\par   }{\f1 JUDGE }{\i\f1 (vb)}{\f1  #}{\b\f1 nam}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (1st person aorist }{\b\i\f1 namin}{\i\f1  "I judge" in VT41:13)}{\f1 , JUDGE }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 N\'e1mo }{\f1 (Ordainer - }{\i\f1 the name of a Vala}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 In MR:150, though, 
}{\b\i\f1 N\'e1mo }{\i\f1 is glossed JUDGEMENT [of what is]).}{\f1  }{\i\f1 Note: a homophone }{\b\i\f1 n\'e1mo }{\i\f1 means "person". -Silm:411}{\f1 
\par   JUDGEMENT }{\b\f1 n\'e1mi\'eb}{\f1  \endash  defined as "a (single) judgement" or "a (single) desire". A JUDGEMENT }{\b\f1 n\'e1ma}{\f1  (desire). JUDGEMENT }{\i\f1 (of what is)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 N\'e1mo}{\f1  (but this is elsewh
ere glossed "Ordainer", and the ending -}{\b\f1 o}{\f1  normally does indicate something animate/masculine rather than something abstract). }{\i\f1 -VT41:13, MR:150}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 JUICE }{\b\f1 s\'e1va}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 pirya }{\f1 (syrup) }{\i\f1 -SAB, PIS
\par   }{\f1 JULY }{\b\f1 Cermi\'eb }{\i\f1 -LotR:1144
\par   }{\f1 JUNE }{\b\f1 N\'e1ri\'eb }{\i\f1 -LotR:1144
\par   }{\f1 JUPITER }{\b\f1 Alcarinqu\'eb }{\i\f1 (Basic Quenya:24, cf. Silm:55. According to LT1:260, }{\b\i\f1 Morwen }{\i\f1 
(there translated "daughter of the dark") is a name of Jupiter, but this may not be a valid word in Tolkien's later Quenya. LT1:265 also mentions }{\b\i\f1 Silindo}{\i\f1  as a name of this planet.
\par }{\f1   JUST }{\b\f1 faila }{\f1 (fair-minded, generous) }{\i\f1 -PM:352
\par   
\par }{\b\f1\fs24   <K>}{\f1 
\par   KEEN }{\b\f1 laic\'eb }{\i\f1 [possibly a misreading for }{\b\i\f1 laica}{\i\f1 ] }{\f1 (sharp, acute, *piercing); KEENNESS }{\i\f1 (of perception)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 laic\'eb }{\f1 (acuteness) }{\i\f1 -LAIK
\par   }{\f1 KEEPING }{\i\f1 (safe) }{\b\f1 mando }{\f1 (custody) }{\i\f1 -MR:350
\par   }{\f1 KHAZAD-D\'dbM }{\b\f1 Casarrondo }{\f1 (Dwarrowvault) }{\i\f1 -WJ:389
\par   }{\f1 KIN }{\b\f1 noss\'eb }{\f1 (house, people) }{\i\f1 -LT1:250, 272/LT2:338}{\f1  
\par   KIND }{\b\f1 nostal\'eb }{\f1 (species) }{\i\f1 -LT1:272
\par }{\f1   KINDLE }{\b\f1 tinta- }{\f1 (cause to sparkle), }{\b\f1 turu-}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tunda-}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Note: there is a homophone meaning "tall") -Silm:438, LT1:270
\par   }{\f1 KING }{\b\f1 aran }{\i\f1 (pl }{\b\i\f1 arani }{\i\f1 is attested) In Etym, the Quenya word for "king, chieftain" is }{\b\i\f1 haran }{\i\f1 pl. }{\b\i\f1 harni}{\i\f1 , but evidence from LotR, WJ and UT shows that Tolkien changed it to }{\b\i\f1 
aran}{\i\f1  pl }{\b\i\f1 arani}{\i\f1 . Cf. }{\b\i\f1 as\'eba aranion }{\i\f1 "kingsfoil", }{\b\i\f1 i arani Eldaron }{\i\f1 "the Kings of the Eldar", }{\b\i\f1 Arandor }{\i\f1 "kingsland", }{\b\i\f1 aranya *}{\i\f1 "my king", }{\b\i\f1 arandil }{\i\f1 
"king's friend, royalist", and }{\b\i\f1 arandur}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 "king's servant, minister".) LT1:273 has }{\b\i\f1 vardar }{\i\f1 "king", but this is hardly a valid word in LotR-style Quenya. }{\f1 KINGLY BULL }{\b\f1 Aramund }{\i\f1 
(this may not be pure Quenya) -3AR, LotR:899, WJ:369, UT:165, 193, 313, Letters:386, 423
\par   }{\f1 KINGSFISHER }{\b\f1 halatirno}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 halatir }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 halatirn-}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (lit. "fishwatcher") -SKAL}{\b\i\f1\fs12 2}{\i\f1 , TIR
\par }{\f1   KNIGHT }{\b\f1 roquen }{\f1 (rider, horseman)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -UT:282 cf. WJ:372
\par   }{\f1 KNOB }{\b\f1 tolos }{\f1 (lump) }{\i\f1 -LT1:269
\par   }{\f1 KNOCK }{\i\f1 (keep on knocking) }{\b\f1 tamba- }{\i\f1 -TAM  
\par   }{\f1 KNOLL }{\b\f1 n\'f3la }{\i\f1 -NDOL
\par   }{\f1 KNOT }{\b\f1 narda}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 n\'fat\'eb }{\f1 (bond). }{\i\f1 Pl. probably *}{\b\i\f1 n\'fater}{\i\f1  not }{\b\i\f1 *n\'fati}{\i\f1 ; cf. the similar formation }{\b\i\f1 ty\'e1v\'eb }{\i\f1 "taste", pl }{\b\i\f1 ty\'e1ver}{\i\f1 .}{\f1  }{
\i\f1 -SNAR, NU
\par   }{\f1 KNOW }{\b\f1 ista }{\f1 (pa.t. }{\b\f1 sint\'eb}{\f1 ); KNOW ABOUT }{\b\f1 hanya}{\f1 - (understand, be skilled in dealing with), KNOWLEDGE }{\b\f1 hand\'eb }{\f1 (understanding),}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 ista}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 istya}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 iss\'eb }{
\f1 (lore), }{\b\f1 n\'f3l\'eb}{\f1  (long study, lore, wisdom). }{\i\f1 (In Etym this word is spelt with initial }{\b\i\f1 \'f1}{\i\f1 , that is, }{\b\i\f1 ng}{\i\f1 . Initial }{\b\i\f1 ng }{\i\f1 had become }{\b\i\f1 n }{\i\f1 
in Third Age Quenya, and I follow the system of LotR and transcribe it accordingly. }{\b\i\f1 N\'f3l\'eb }{\i\f1 is so spelt also in Silm:432. But if this word is written in Tengwar, the initial }{\b\i\f1 n }{\i\f1 should be transcribed with the letter }{
\b\i\f1 noldo}{\i\f1 , not }{\b\i\f1 n\'famen}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1  HAVING KNOWLEDGE }{\b\f1 istima }{\f1 (wise, learned) }{\i\f1 -IS/LT2:339; KHAN, \'d1GOL, Silm:432
\par   K}{\f1 -SERIES }{\b\f1 calmat\'e9ma }{\i\f1 -LotR:1154 }{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   
\par }{\b\i\f1\fs24   }{\b\f1\fs24 <L>}{\b\i\f1\fs24 
\par }{\b\f1   }{\f1 LABIALS }{\b\f1 parmat\'e9ma }{\f1 (}{\i\f1 p}{\f1 -series); LABIALIZED SERIES }{\b\f1 quesset\'e9ma }{\i\f1 -LotR:1154
\par   }{\f1 LABERNUM }{\b\f1 Lindelokt\'eb }{\f1 (singing cluster). }{\i\f1 (So in LT1:258, but Tolkien later decided that }{\b\i\f1 kt }{\i\f1 became }{\b\i\f1 ht }{\i\f1 in Quenya. Read }{\b\i\f1 *Lindeloht\'eb}{\i\f1 ?) -LT1:258}{\f1 
\par   LABOUR }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 m\'f3ta- }{\f1 (toil) }{\i\f1 -M\'d4 }{\f1 
\par   LACKING }{\b\f1 penya}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 peny\'eb}{\i\f1  is attested)}{\f1  (inadequate). LACKING SIGN #}{\b\f1 penya tengwe}{\f1  (only pl. }{\b\f1 peny\'eb tengwi}{\f1  is att
ested). This term, also translated "indadequate signs", was used in early Elvish analysis of Quenya as the term for vowels with no preceding consonant, held (in many cases incorrectly) to have lost such a consonant. -}{\i\f1 VT39:6, 8}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1   }{\f1 LADY }{\b\f1 heri }{\i\f1 -KHER, LT1:272}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (GL:45 has }{\b\i\f1 quimell\'eb}{\i\f1 )
\par   }{\f1 LAKE }{\b\f1 ailin }{\f1 (pool) }{\i\f1 (LT2:339 also has }{\b\i\f1 ailo}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 ring\'eb }{\f1 (cold lake, pool [in mountains]) }{\i\f1 (Note: }{\b\i\f1 ring\'eb }{\i\f1 is also an adjective meaning "cold") -AY/LT2:339, RINGI

\par   }{\f1 LAMENT }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 naina-}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ny\'e9na}{\f1 -; LAMENT (noun) }{\b\f1 naini\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 nair\'eb }{\i\f1 -NAY, LT1:262, RGEO:66
\par   }{\f1 LAMP }{\b\f1 calma }{\f1 (light) }{\i\f1 -KAL/LotR:1157
\par   }{\f1 LAND }{\b\f1 n\'f3r\'eb}{\f1  (dwelling-place, race, country, region where certain people live, nation, native land, family)}{\i\f1 , }{\b\f1 n\'f3r }{\i\f1 (meaning '"'land' as opposed to water or sea", WJ:413)}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 In compounds }{\f1 #
}{\b\f1 -ndor}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 (when the first part of the compound end in a vowel, e.g.}{\b\i\f1  Valandor }{\i\f1 "Vala-land", alternative form of }{\b\i\f1 Valinor}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 or }{\b\f1 -nor}{\f1 , -}{\b\f1 dor}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
(the latter can only occur when the first part of the compound ends in }{\b\i\f1 -l}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 -r}{\i\f1 , or }{\b\i\f1 -n}{\i\f1 ; in other combinations }{\b\i\f1 d }{\i\f1 cannot occur in Noldorin Quenya).}{\f1  }{\i\f1 Cf. also}{\f1  }{\b\f1 l
\'f3na }{\f1 (remote land difficult to reach, island. }{\i\f1 Note: a homophone means "dark"}{\f1 ); WESTLAND }{\b\f1 N\'famenor}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 N\'famen\'f3r\'eb }{\f1 (Westernesse);}{\i\f1  }{\f1 LAND OF GIFT }{\i\f1 (a name of N\'famenor)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 
Andor }{\f1 (< }{\b\i\f1 *}{\b\f1 Annandor}{\f1 , see GIFT), LAND OF THE WEST }{\b\f1 N\'famendor }{\i\f1 -NDOR/N\'d4/Silm:430/ WJ:413, LONO, Silm:414, 313, 430
\par   }{\f1 LANGUAGE }{\b\f1 quetil }{\f1 (tongue), }{\b\f1 lamb\'eb }{\f1 (tongue. }{\i\f1 The latter was "the usual word, in non-technical use, for 'language'." (WJ:394) Only the Loremasters used the technical term }{\b\i\f1 tengwesta }{\i\f1 
"system or code of signs" instead; this word is also glossed "grammar".}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 Notice that }{\b\i\f1 lamb\'eb}{\i\f1  is also used for "dialect" (VT39:15)}{\f1 .}{\i\f1  }{\f1 LANGUAGE }{\i\f1 
(as an abstract, the ability to speak or the "art" of making speech) }{\b\f1 tengwesti\'eb}{\f1 . LANGUAGE }{\i\f1 with especial reference to phonology:}{\f1  }{\b\f1 Lambel\'eb}{\i\f1 . }{\f1 LANGUAGE OF THE VALAR }{\b\f1 Lamb\'eb Valarinwa}{\f1  }{
\i\f1 (lit. *"Valarin language")}{\f1 ,}{\b\f1  }{\f1 LANGUAGE OF THE ELDAR }{\b\f1 Eldarissa }{\i\f1 (the latter may not be a valid word in LotR-style Quenya) -KWET, WJ:394, 397, VT39:15, LT2:339
\par   }{\f1 LARCH }{\b\f1 fin\'eb }{\i\f1 -SPIN
\par   }{\f1 LARGE }{\b\f1 alta}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 alat- }{\f1 (great in size) }{\i\f1 (Tolkien's definition of this word was actually illegible, but see GREAT)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 \'fav\'eba }{\f1 (very large, abundant, in a very great number), }{\b\f1 \'fara}{\f1  }{
\i\f1 -\'c1LAT, UB, UR
\par   }{\f1 LARK }{\b\f1 lirulin }{\i\f1 (prob. *}{\b\i\f1 lirulind-}{\i\f1 , cf. }{\b\i\f1 lindo }{\i\f1 "singing bird") -MR:238/252, LIN}{\i\f1\fs12 2
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 LAST }{\b\f1 tella }{\f1 (hindmost), }{\b\f1 telda }{\f1 (final), }{\b\f1 m\'e9tima }{\f1 (final, ultimate), }{\b\f1 telwa}{\f1  (late), LAST YEAR }{\b\f1 yenya}{\f1 ; LAST DAY OF YEAR }{\b\f1 quantien}{\f1 , THE LAST-COMERS }{\b\f1 
Teleri }{\f1 (the Hindmost) }{\i\f1 -TELES, WJ:411, MC:222 cf. 215, LT1:267, YEN, Silm:421
\par   }{\f1 LASTING QUALITY }{\b\f1 voronwi\'eb }{\f1 (endurance) }{\i\f1 -BOR\'d3N
\par   }{\f1 LATE }{\b\f1 telwa }{\f1 (last) }{\i\f1 -LT1:267
\par   }{\f1 LAUGH }{\b\f1 lala}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 -PM:359 cf. 343. (Note: a homophone means "deny".)}{\f1  Past tense perhaps *}{\b\f1 land\'eb}{\f1 , given the derivation stated (whereas }{\b\f1 lala}{\f1  "deny" might have the past tense *}{\b\f1 lalan\'eb}{
\f1  or *}{\b\f1 lall\'eb}{\f1 ). 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 LAW }{\b\f1 sany\'eb }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (rule), }{\b\f1 axan }{\f1 (rule, commandment, as proceeding primarily from Eru; pl. }{\b\f1 axani}{\f1  is attested); LAW-ABIDING }{\b\f1 sanya}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 
) (normal, regular) }{\i\f1 -STAN, WJ:399, VT39:30, 23
\par   }{\f1 LAWN }{\b\f1 palis }{\f1 (sward) }{\i\f1 -LT1:264 
\par   }{\f1 LAY }{\b\f1 lirilla }{\f1 (song) }{\i\f1 -LT1:258  
\par   }{\f1 LEAD }{\i\f1 (the metal)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 canu}{\f1 , LEADEN }{\b\f1 canuva }{\i\f1 -LT1:268
\par   }{\f1 LEAF }{\b\f1 lass\'eb }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 lassi }{\i\f1 is attested)}{\f1 ; HAVING MANY LEAVES }{\b\f1 lillass\'eba }{\i\f1 (pl }{\b\i\f1 lillassi\'eb }{\i\f1 is attested)}{\f1 ; COLLECTION OF LEAVES }{\b\f1 olassi\'eb}{\f1 
 (foliage); PUT FORTH LEAVES OR FLOWERS *}{\b\f1 lohta- }{\i\f1 (corrected from the actual reading }{\b\i\f1 lokta }{\i\f1 because Tolkien later decided that }{\b\i\f1 kt }{\i\f1 became }{\b\i\f1 ht }{\i\f1 in Quenya)}{\f1  (sprout). LEAF-SHAPED }{\b\f1 
lassecanta}{\f1 ; LEAF-FALL }{\b\f1 lasselanta }{\i\f1 (autumn or the beginning of winter; see also FADING)}{\f1 ; LEAF-GREY }{\b\f1 lassemista}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -LAS}{\i\f1\fs12 1}{\i\f1 
, Nam, VT39:9, LT1:254, MC:222, 223, Letters:282, LT1:258, KAT, LotR:505 cf. Letters:224}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 LEAGUE }{\b\f1 l\'e1r }{\i\f1 (basic meaning "pause" - in marches a brief halt was made for each league). A }{\b\i\f1 l\'e1r }{\i\f1 was defined as five thousand }{\b\i\f1 rangar}{\i\f1 ; see YARD. A }{\b\i\f1 ranga }{\i\f1 
was approximately 38 inches, so a }{\b\i\f1 l\'e1r }{\i\f1 was "5277 yards, two feet and four inches [ca. 4826 meters], supposing the equivalence to be exact" - close enough to our league of 5280 yards to justify this translation. -UT:285
\par }{\f1   LEANING }{\b\f1 talta }{\f1 (sloping, tilted) }{\i\f1 -TAL\'c1T
\par   }{\f1 LEAP }{\b\f1 halta-}{\f1 ; LEAPING }{\b\f1 haloit\'eb }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 haloisi }{\i\f1 is attested) -LT1:254
\par   }{\f1 LEARNED }{\b\f1 istima }{\f1 (wise, having knowledge), }{\b\f1 n\'f3la }{\f1 (wise). }{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (In Etym, the latter word is spelt with initial }{\b\i\f1 \'f1}{\i\f1 , that is, }{\b\i\f1 ng}{\i\f1 . Initial }{\b\i\f1 ng }{\i\f1 had become }{
\b\i\f1 n }{\i\f1 in Third Age Quenya, and I follow the system of LotR and transcribe it accordingly. Cf. also the spelling of the related word }{\b\i\f1 n\'f3l\'eb}{\i\f1  in Silm:432. But if this word is written in Tengwar, the initial }{\b\i\f1 n }{
\i\f1 should be transcribed with the letter }{\b\i\f1 noldo}{\i\f1 , not }{\b\i\f1 n\'famen}{\i\f1 .) }{\f1 LEARNED MAN }{\b\f1 istyar }{\f1 (scholar) }{\i\f1 -IS, \'d1GOL
\par   }{\f1 LEAVE }{\i\f1 (vb)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 auta- }{\f1 (go away, pass), }{\i\f1 pa.t. }{\b\f1 oant\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 oanti\'eb }{\i\f1 (in the physical sense "went away [to another place]") or }{\b\f1 v\'e1n\'eb }{\i\f1 
("the most frequently used past [tense]" - less "physical" than }{\b\i\f1 oant\'eb}{\i\f1 , meaning "disappeared" rather than "went away"), perf. }{\b\f1 av\'e1ni\'eb }{\i\f1 (pl }{\b\i\f1 av\'e1nier }{\i\f1 is attested); perf. }{\b\i\f1 v\'e1ni\'eb }{
\i\f1 with no augment may occur in verse. For "leave", Etym also has }{\b\i\f1 lesta}{\i\f1 , pa.t. }{\b\i\f1 lend\'eb}{\i\f1 ; this is also the past tense of "go". The stem from which }{\b\i\f1 lesta- }{\i\f1 is derived was "replaced" by another. }{
\b\i\f1 Lesta }{\i\f1 has a wholly different meaning in later writings; see GIRDLE, MEASURE. }{\f1 LEAVE OUT }{\b\f1 hehta- }{\i\f1 (pa.t. }{\b\i\f1 hehtan\'eb }{\i\f1 is given but seems perfectly regular) }{\f1 (put aside, exclude, abandon, forsake) }{
\i\f1 -WJ:366}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 ELED
\par   }{\f1 LEAVE }{\i\f1 (noun) - with leave of: }{\b\f1 len\'e9m\'eb }{\f1 (+ genitive)}{\i\f1 
\par   }{\f1 LEFT }{\b\f1 hyarya}{\f1 ; LEFT-HANDED }{\b\f1 hyarmait\'eb
\par   }{\f1 LEG }{\b\f1 telco }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 telqui}{\i\f1 ) }{\f1 (stem) }{\i\f1 -TEL\'c9K
\par   }{\f1 LEGENDARIUM OF THE FATHERS OF MEN }{\b\f1 Atanat\'e1rion }{\i\f1 (lit. simply "of the Fathers of Men") -MR:373
\par   }{\f1 LEGOLAS }{\b\f1 Laiqualass\'eb }{\i\f1 -LT1:267
\par   }{\f1 LEMBAS }{\b\f1 coimas }{\f1 (life-bread) }{\i\f1 (prob. }{\b\i\f1 coimast}{\i\f1 [}{\b\i\f1 a}{\i\f1 ]-, cf. }{\b\i\f1 masta }{\i\f1 "bread") }{\f1 (life-bread) }{\i\f1 -Silm:406/429
\par   }{\f1 LENGTHENED }{\b\f1 taina }{\f1 (extended, stretched, elongated); LENGTHENING }{\b\f1 tail\'eb }{\f1 (extension) }{\i\f1 -TAY cf. VT39:7
\par }{\f1  -LESS -}{\b\f1 vilt\'eb}{\f1 , -}{\b\f1 valta}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (evidently a suffix used to derive adjectives) -GL:23
\par   }{\f1 LESSEN }{\b\f1 p\'edca }{\i\f1 (part. #}{\b\i\f1 p\'edcala }{\i\f1 is attested) }{\f1 (dwindle) }{\i\f1 -MC:223, 222}{\f1 
\par   LET }{\i\f1 (see ALLOW)}{\f1 ; LET GO }{\b\f1 lerya}{\f1  (release, set free) }{\i\f1 -VT41:5, 6 
\par   }{\f1 LETTER }{\b\f1 tengwa }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 tengwar }{\i\f1 is attested; this word was used primarily of the F\'ebanorian letters. However, the term "Tengwar of R\'famil" occurring in LotR:1151 seems to indicate that the word }{\b\i\f1 tengwa }{
\i\f1 can indeed be used of a letter of any kind, not only the F\'ebanorian letters. In non-technical use }{\b\i\f1 tengwa }{\i\f1 may also be translated "consonant" [q.v.]. It is uncertain whether }{\b\i\f1 tengwa }{\i\f1 
"letter" can be used in the sense }{\f1 mail, text sent in the post}{\i\f1 ; the primary meaning is clearly "character, a single symbol in writing".) }{\b\f1 sarat}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 sarati }{\i\f1 
is attested) - an older [MET] word Tolkien notes was used of "a 'letter' or any individual significant mark", used of the R\'familian letters after the invention of the F\'ebanorian Tengwar (but cf. the term "Tengwar of R\'fa
mil" mentioned above). -TEK, WJ:396, LotR:1151}{\f1 
\par   LIBERTY (see }{\i\f1 FREE}{\f1 ); \endash  DEPRIVE OF LIBERTY }{\b\f1 avalerya}{\f1 - (bind, make fast, restrain) }{\i\f1 -VT41:5, 6}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 LICK }{\b\f1 salpa- }{\f1 (sup, sip), }{\b\f1 lavin}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 ("I lick", 1st pers. aorist; past tense }{\b\i\f1 #l\'e1v\'eb }{\i\f1 is attested in the word }{\b\i\f1 undul\'e1v\'eb }{\i\f1 "downlicked" in Nam)}{\f1 ; LICK }{\i\f1 
(frequentatively) }{\b\f1 lapsa- }{\i\f1 -S\'c1LAP cf. LT1:266, DAB/Nam}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
\par   }{\f1 LIE }{\i\f1 (noun, = untruth) }{\b\f1 furu }{\f1 -}{\i\f1\cgrid0 LT2:340,}{\f1\cgrid0  }{\i\f1 GL:36}{\f1 
\par   LIE }{\i\f1 (vb, not "tell a lie" but "lie [horisontally]") }{\b\f1 caita-}{\f1 ; LIE HEAVY }{\b\f1 lumna- }{\i\f1 (Note: this is also an adjective meaning "lying heavy") -Nam/RGEO:67, DUB
\par   }{\f1 LIFE }{\b\f1 cuil\'eb }{\f1 (being alive; }{\i\f1 obsoleting }{\b\i\f1 coi}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 coir\'eb }{\i\f1 in LT1:257; the latter means "stirring, spring" in Tolkien's later Quenya}{\f1 ); NEW LIFE }{\b\f1 laito}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 laisi }{\f1 
(vigour, youth), LIFE-BREAD }{\b\f1 coimas }{\i\f1 (prob. }{\b\i\f1 coimast}{\i\f1 [}{\b\i\f1 a}{\i\f1 ]-, cf. }{\b\i\f1 masta }{\i\f1 "bread")}{\f1  (lembas) }{\i\f1 -KUY, LT1:267, Silm:406/429
\par   }{\f1 LIFT UP }{\b\f1 orta- }{\f1 (raise, rise; }{\i\f1 pa.t. }{\b\i\f1 ortan\'eb }{\i\f1 is attested}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 -Nam/ORO/RGEO:67
\par   }{\f1 LIGHT }{\b\f1 c\'e1l\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 cala}{\f1 ; A LIGHT }{\b\f1 calina }{\i\f1 (which is basically the }{\f1 adjective }{\i\f1 "light", but it is used substantively in }{\b\i\f1 coacalina}{\i\f1 ; see LIGHT OF THE HOUSE under HOUSE)}{\f1 , }{
\b\f1 calma }{\f1 (lamp), LIGHT }{\i\f1 (adj) }{\b\f1 calina}{\f1 ; RAY OF LIGHT }{\b\f1 alca}{\f1 ; GLITTERING LIGHT }{\b\f1 rilma}{\f1 ; STARLIGHT }{\i\f1 or }{\f1 LIGHT OF SILPION (Telperion) }{\b\f1 silm\'eb}{\f1  (\'86silver), MOONLIGHT }{\b\f1 isilm
\'eb}{\f1 ; EMIT LIGHT }{\b\f1 faina-}{\f1 ; LIGHT-ELVES, ELVES OF THE LIGHT }{\b\f1 Calaquendi}{\f1 ; LIGHT-CLEFT }{\b\f1 Calacirya }{\i\f1 (gen. }{\b\i\f1 Calaciryo }{\i\f1 
is attested)  -KAL, MR:250, AKLA-R, RIL, SIL/LotR:1157, MC:223, PHAY, WJ:361/Silm:61, RGEO:70/Nam
\par   }{\f1 LIKE }{\i\f1 (prep) }{\b\f1 ve }{\f1 (as) }{\i\f1 -Nam/RGEO:66, 67
\par   }{\f1 LILY }{\b\f1 indil }{\i\f1 ("or other large single flower")}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 n\'e9nu }{\i\f1 (= yellow water lily) -WJ:399, LT1:248
\par   }{\f1 LINE OF SURF }{\b\f1 falass\'eb }{\f1 (beach, shore) }{\i\f1 -Silm:431 
\par   }{\f1 LINDI }{\b\f1 Lindi }{\i\f1 (What the Nandorin Elves called themselves; the word could be adopted unchanged into Exilic Quenya. Sg }{\b\i\f1 #Lind\'eb}{\i\f1 ?) -WJ:385 
\par }{\b\i\f1   }{\f1 LINDIL }{\i\f1 Sindarin form of LINDI, q.v. -WJ:385
\par  }{\f1  LINDON }{\b\f1 Lindon}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Lind\'f3n\'eb }{\i\f1 -WJ:385}{\f1 
\par   LINE }{\b\f1 ti\'eb }{\f1 (path, direction, course, way, road), }{\b\f1 t\'eba}{\f1  (straight line, road) }{\i\f1 (note: not to be confused with the verb }{\b\i\f1 t\'eba}{\i\f1 - "indicate")}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 t\'e9ma }{\f1 (row, series) }{\i\f1 (pl. }{
\b\f1 t\'e9mar }{\i\f1 is attested in LotR:1153) -TE3/RGEO:67, TE\'d1
\par   }{\f1 LIP }{\b\f1 p\'e9}{\f1  (so according to a late source; glossed "mouth" in the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1 , stem }{\i\f1 PEG}{\f1 ), dual }{\b\f1 peu}{\f1  "the two lips, the mouth-opening". Early "Qenya" had }{\b\f1 c\'edla}{\f1  for "lip". }{
\i\f1 -VT39:9, GN:24
\par  }{\f1  LION }{\b\f1 r\'e1 }{\f1 (pl }{\b\f1 r\'e1vi}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (so in Etym; LT1:260 has }{\b\i\f1 rau}{\i\f1 , but pl }{\b\i\f1 r\'e1vi }{\i\f1 is the same.)}{\f1  SHE-LION }{\b\f1 ravenn\'eb}{\i\f1  -RAW, LT1:260
\par   }{\f1 LIQUID }{\i\f1 (adj) }{\b\f1 s\'edrima }{\f1 (flowing) }{\i\f1 -LT1:265
\par  }{\b\i\f1  }{\f1 LISTEN }{\b\f1 l\'e1r-}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 lasta}{\f1 -; LISTENING }{\i\f1 (adj)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 lasta }{\f1 (hearing) }{\i\f1 -LAS}{\i\f1\fs12 2}{\i\f1 
\par   }{\f1 LITTLE }{\b\f1 titta }{\f1 (tiny). LITTLE ELF }{\b\f1 Teler}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Telell\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (adj. }{\b\i\f1 teler\'eba}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 telella}{\i\f1 )}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -TIT, LT1:267
\par   }{\f1 LO! }{\b\f1 ela }{\f1 (look! see!) }{\i\f1 (directing sight to an actually visible object) -WJ:362 cf. 360}{\f1  
\par   LOAF }{\b\f1 corn\'eb }{\i\f1 -LT1:257}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 LOATH }{\b\f1 yelta-}{\f1 ; LOATHING }{\b\f1 yelma}{\f1 ; LOATHSOME }{\b\f1 yelwa }{\i\f1 -DYEL }{\f1 
\par   LOCK OF HAIR }{\b\f1 find\'eb}{\f1  (tress), }{\b\f1 fass\'eb }{\f1 (shaggy lock, tangled hair) }{\i\f1 -SPIN
\par   }{\f1 LOFTY }{\b\f1 t\'e1ra }{\f1 (tall, high) }{\i\f1 (According to Letters:282, }{\b\i\f1 Varda }{\i\f1 means "Lofty" [WJ:402 has "the Sublime"], but this word should probably not be used as a common adjective.)}{\f1  LOFTY TOWER }{\i\f1 see TOWER. -T
\'c2/Silm:437/LT1:264
\par   }{\f1 LOGDRAWING }{\b\f1 turuhalm\'eb }{\i\f1 -LT1:270
\par   }{\f1 LONELY }{\b\f1 eress\'eba}{\f1 ; LONELY ISLE }{\b\f1 Tol Eress\'eba }{\i\f1 (}{\b\i\f1 tol }{\i\f1 "isle" often being omitted) }{\f1 -}{\i\f1 ERE, RGEO:70
\par   }{\f1 LONG }{\i\f1 (adj) }{\b\f1 anda}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 s\'f3ra }{\f1 (trailing); LONG AND THIN }{\b\f1 lenwa }{\f1 (straight, narrow); LONG }{\i\f1 (adverb, of time:) }{\b\f1 andav\'eb}{\f1 ;}{\b\f1  }{\f1 LONG YEAR }{\i\f1 
(144 solar years, an Elvish "century") }{\b\f1 y\'e9n }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 y\'e9ni }{\i\f1 is attested) }{\f1 LONG-MARK }{\b\f1 andatehta}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -\'c1NAD, LT2:344, 341, LotR:989, Nam/LotR:1141/YEN, TEK     
\par   }{\f1 LONG FOR }{\b\f1 milya-}{\f1 ;}{\b\f1  }{\f1 GREAT LONGING}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 mavoin\'eb }{\i\f1 -MIL-IK, LT2:345
\par   }{\f1 LONG-LASTING }{\b\f1 voronwa }{\f1 (enduring) }{\i\f1 -BOR\'d3N}{\f1 
\par   LOOK AT }{\b\f1 y\'e9ta-}{\f1 ; LOOK! }{\i\f1 (interj) }{\b\f1 en }{\f1 (there, look! yonder) }{\i\f1  }{\f1 LOOK! }{\b\f1 ela }{\f1 (lo! see!) }{\i\f1 (directing sight to an actually visible object) -LT1:262, EN, WJ:362 cf. 360}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 LOOM }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 lanwa}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 windel\'eb }{\i\f1 -LAN, LT1:254
\par   }{\f1 LOOSE }{\b\f1 leuca-}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 lehta- }{\f1 (slacken) }{\i\f1 (Note: }{\b\i\f1 leuca }{\i\f1 is also a noun meaning "snake". Anyway, }{\b\i\f1 leuca}{\i\f1 -}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 in Etym is likely a misreading for *}{\b\i\f1 lenca}{\i\f1 
-. The certain form }{\b\i\f1 lehta}{\i\f1 - is to be preferred.) -LEK
\par   }{\f1 LORD }{\b\f1 heru}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 h\'e9r}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 as final part of compounds: }{\b\f1 #her}{\i\f1 , e.g. }{\b\f1 Ostoher }{\f1 *"City-Lord". LORDSHIP }{\b\f1 h\'e9r\'eb}{\f1 ;}{\b\f1  }{\f1 LORD OF TREES }{\b\f1 Aldaron }{\i\f1 
(a name of Orom\'eb) -LT1:272, Silm:432, Letters:282, LotR:1122, Silm:32, 378, VT41:9
\par   }{\f1 LORE }{\b\f1 n\'f3l\'eb}{\f1  (long study, wisdom, knowledge), \'86}{\b\f1 ingol\'eb }{\f1 (deep lore, magic }{\i\f1 [in WJ:382, the gloss is simply "lore", and the word is not stated to be poetic]}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 iss\'eb}{\f1 ; SECRET LORE}{
\i\f1  }{\b\f1 nolw\'eb }{\f1 (wisdom). }{\i\f1 (These forms obsolete }{\b\i\f1 n\'f3lem\'eb }{\i\f1 in LT1:263. In some sources, }{\b\i\f1 n\'f3l\'eb }{\i\f1 and }{\b\i\f1 nolw\'eb}{\i\f1  are spelt with initial }{\b\i\f1 \'f1}{\i\f1 , that is, }{
\b\i\f1 ng}{\i\f1 . Initial }{\b\i\f1 ng }{\i\f1 had become }{\b\i\f1 n }{\i\f1 in Third Age Quenya, and I follow the system of LotR and transcribe it accordingly. Cf. also the spelling of the related word }{\b\i\f1 n\'f3l\'eb}{\i\f1 
 in Silm:432. But if these words are written in Tengwar, the initial }{\b\i\f1 n }{\i\f1 should be transcribed with the letter }{\b\i\f1 noldo}{\i\f1 , not }{\b\i\f1 n\'famen}{\i\f1 .) }{\f1 LOREMASTER }{\b\f1 ingolmo }{\i\f1 (In }{\b\i\f1 Lambengolmor }{
\i\f1 "Loremasters of Tongues" the initial }{\b\i\f1 i }{\i\f1 of }{\b\i\f1 ingolmo }{\i\f1 [pl }{\b\i\f1 ingolmor}{\i\f1 ]}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 has disappeared; perhaps }{\b\i\f1 #ngolmo }{\i\f1 
is the form used in compounds when the first part of the compound ends in a vowel.) -\'d1GOL, LT2:339, WJ:382, WJ:383/396
\par }{\f1   LOST }{\b\f1 vanwa }{\f1 (gone, departed, vanished, past and over, no longer to be had, dead); ONE LOST OR FORSAKEN BY FRIENDS }{\b\f1 hecil}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (gender-spesific forms are }{\b\i\f1 hecilo }{\i\f1 m. and }{\b\i\f1 hecil\'eb }{\i\f1 f.) }
{\f1 (waif, outcast, outlaw) }{\i\f1 -WAN, Nam, WJ:366, 365
\par   }{\f1 LOT }{\b\f1 marto }{\f1 (fortune, fate) }{\i\f1 -LT2:348
\par   }{\f1 LOUD SOUND }{\b\f1 r\'f3ma }{\f1 (trumpet-sound) }{\i\f1 (Note: }{\b\i\f1 r\'f3ma }{\i\f1 also means "shoulder".) }{\f1 MUSICAL SOUND }{\b\f1 lin }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 lind-}{\f1 ) (melody) }{\i\f1 -ROM, LotR:488 cf. Letters:308        
\par   }{\f1 LOVE }{\i\f1 (vb, love as friend)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 mel-}{\f1 ; LOVE }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 melm\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (LT1:262 has }{\b\i\f1 meles}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 meless\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 ; LOVELY }{\b\f1 melwa}{\f1 , LOVING }{\b\f1 nilda }{\f1 
(friendly), }{\b\f1 m\'e9la}{\f1  (affectionate), BELOVED }{\b\f1 melda }{\f1 (dear), LOVER }{\b\f1 meldo }{\i\f1 (pl }{\b\i\f1 meldor }{\i\f1 is attested),}{\f1  }{\b\f1 melindo }{\i\f1 (m.)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 meliss\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (f.)}{\f1 ; LOVEABLE }{
\b\f1 melima }{\f1 (fair), }{\b\f1 \'edrima }{\f1 (desireable) }{\i\f1 -MEL, LT1:262, WJ:412, NIL, VT39:11, ID   
\par   }{\f1 LOW, LOWLYING }{\b\f1 tumna }{\f1 (deep, profound, dark or hidden); LOWER AIR }{\b\f1 vilma }{\i\f1 (earlier [MET] }{\b\i\f1 wilma}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Aiwenor }{\i\f1 (lit. "Birdland") -TUB cf. LT1:271, WIL, AIW\'ca 
\par  }{\b\f1  }{\f1 LOWER }{\i\f1 (vb)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 luvu- }{\f1 (brood); DARK LOWERING CLOUD }{\b\f1 lumbo}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 lumbor }{\i\f1 is attested). -LT1:259 
\par   }{\f1 LUCK }{\b\f1 valto}{\f1  (}{\i\f1 LT2:348 gives }{\b\i\f1 mart }{\i\f1 "a piece of luck", but word-final }{\b\i\f1 rt }{\i\f1 does not occur in LotR-style Quenya. Read *}{\b\i\f1 mart\'eb }{\i\f1 or something similar?) -LT1:272, LT2:348
\par   }{\f1 LUMP }{\b\f1 tolos }{\f1 (knob) }{\i\f1 -LT1:269
\par   }{\f1 LUST }{\b\f1 mail\'eb}{\f1 ; LUSTFUL }{\b\f1 mail\'eba }{\i\f1 -MIL-IK
\par   }{\f1 LYING HEAVY }{\b\f1 lumna}{\b\i\f1  }{\f1 (heavy, burdensome, oppressive, ominous) }{\i\f1 (Note: }{\b\i\f1 lumna }{\i\f1 is also a verb meaning "lie heavy")}{\f1 ; LYING IN BED }{\b\f1 caila }{\f1 (sickness) }{\i\f1 -DUB, KAY
\par   }{\f1 LYRE }{\b\f1 salma }{\i\f1 -LT1:265
\par 
\par }{\b\f1\fs24   <M>}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 MAEDHROS }{\b\f1 Nelyafinw\'eb }{\i\f1 (meaning "Finw\'eb third", not equivalent in sense to Sindarin }{\f1 Maedhros}{\i\f1 . The short form of the name was }{\b\i\f1 Nelyo}{\i\f1 
. His mother-name [q.v.], "recorded....though never used in narrative", was }{\b\i\f1 Maitimo }{\i\f1 "well-shaped one". He also had a nickname }{\b\i\f1 Russandol }{\i\f1 "copper-top")}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -PM:352, 353}{\f1 
\par   MAGIC \'86}{\b\f1 ingol\'eb }{\f1 (deep lore). }{\i\f1 In LT1:269, }{\b\i\f1 curu }{\i\f1 is glossed "magic, wizardry", but in Etym the gloss is simply "skill". }{\f1 MAGIC }{\i\f1 (adj.) }{\b\f1 sairina}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -\'d1GOL, GL:72
\par   }{\f1 MAGLOR }{\b\f1 Canafinw\'eb}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 short form }{\b\f1 C\'e1no}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 (not equivalent in sense to his Sindarin name, which is the cognate of his "mother-name" }{\b\i\f1 Macalaur\'eb}{\i\f1 
, "recorded...though never used in narrative"). -PM:352, 353
\par }{\b\f1   }{\f1 MAID, MAIDEN }{\b\f1 wend\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 vend\'eb }{\i\f1 (the latter is probably the later [MET] form), also short form }{\b\f1 wen }{\i\f1 pl. }{\b\f1 wendi }{\f1 (girl). }{\i\f1 In compounds }{\b\i\f1 -wen}{\i\f1 , e.g. }{\b\i\f1 
Nerwen }{\i\f1 "Man-maiden" (prob. *-}{\b\i\f1 wend}{\i\f1 -)  }{\f1 MAIDENHOOD }{\b\f1 wendel\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -WEN, LT1:271/273/Silm:439
\par  }{\f1  MAKE }{\b\f1 carin }{\i\f1 ("I make, build", 1st pers. aorist. The same verb is translated "form" in WJ:391: }{\b\i\f1 i carir quettar}{\i\f1 , "those who form words". According to Etym the past tense is }{\b\i\f1 carn\'eb}{\i\f1 
, but both FS and SD:246 have }{\b\i\f1 c\'e1r\'eb}{\i\f1 . Past participle #}{\b\i\f1 carna *}{\i\f1 "made" is attested in }{\b\i\f1 Vincarna }{\i\f1 *"newly-made" in MR:305.) }{\f1 MAKING }{\b\f1 carm\'eb }{\i\f1 
(glossed "art" in UT:396 and is also translated "production", but cf. the following:) }{\f1 NAME-MAKING }{\b\f1 Essecarm\'eb }{\i\f1 (an Eldarin seremony in which the father of a child announces its name.)}{\f1  MAKE FAST}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 avalerya}{\f1 
- (bind, restrain, deprive of liberty). MAKE FOR IT }{\b\f1 m\'edna}{\f1 - (desire to go in some direction, to wish to go to a place, have some end in view).}{\i\f1  -KAR, WJ:391, MR:214, VT41:5, 6, VT39:11
\par   }{\f1 MALE }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 hanu}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (male of Men/Elves or animals)}{\f1 ; MALE }{\i\f1 (adj)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 hanwa }{\i\f1 -3AN, INI
\par   }{\f1 MAN }{\b\f1 n\'e9r }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 ner}{\f1 -) }{\i\f1 (#}{\b\f1 ner }{\i\f1 as the final element in compounds, as in }{\b\i\f1 v\'ebaner }{\i\f1 and }{\b\i\f1 \'faner}{\i\f1 , see below)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 v\'ebo }{\i\f1 (}{\b\i\f1 -w\'eb}{\b\f1  }{
\i\f1 as final element in compounds)}{\f1 ; (ADULT) MAN }{\b\f1 v\'ebaner}{\f1 ; MANLY }{\b\f1 v\'eba }{\f1 (adult, vigorous); MANHOOD }{\b\f1 vi\'eb }{\f1 (vigour); MAN-SPEARHEAD }{\i\f1 (a wedge-formation of soldiers) }{\b\f1 nernehta}{\f1 , NOMAN }{
\b\f1 \'faner }{\i\f1 (All these words can apparently be used of adult males of any sentient race. For "Men" in the sence "humans", see MORTALS, FOLLOWERS.) -DER, WEG, UT:282, UT:211}{\f1 \line   MANAGE }{\b\f1 mahta- }{\f1 
(fight, handle, manage, wield, wield a weapon) }{\i\f1 -TUR, MAK/VT39:10}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 MANY }{\b\f1 limb\'eb}{\f1 ,}{\b\f1  lin- }{\i\f1 (prefix: by assimilation it becomes }{\b\i\f1 lil- }{\i\f1 before }{\b\i\f1 l}{\i\f1 , as in }{\b\i\f1 lillass\'eba }{\i\f1 "having many leaves"; before }{\b\i\f1 m}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 r}{
\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 s }{\i\f1 it would similarly become }{\b\i\f1 *lim-}{\i\f1 ,}{\b\i\f1  *lir-}{\i\f1 ,}{\b\i\f1  *lis-}{\i\f1 ). -LT2:342, LI, Plotz letter
\par   }{\f1 MAR }{\b\f1 #hasta- }{\i\f1 (verb stem isolated from the past participle }{\b\i\f1 hastaina}{\i\f1 , see below); }{\f1 MARRED }{\b\f1 hastaina }{\f1 (Arda Marred = }{\b\f1 Arda Hastaina}{\f1 ); UNMARRED }{\b\f1 alahasta}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -MR:255, 254}
{\f1  
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 MARBLE }{\b\f1 alast}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (sic - some ending is obviously required, e.g. *}{\b\i\f1 alasta}{\i\f1 ) -GL:39
\par   }{\f1 MARCH }{\b\f1 S\'falim\'eb }{\i\f1 -LotR:1144/Silm:437 (not capitalized in the latter source)
\par   }{\f1 MARINER }{\b\f1 ciryamo}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 (professional mariner:) }{\b\f1 \'ebarendur}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 E\'e4rendilyon }{\i\f1 ("son of E\'e4rendil [used of any mariner]", prob. *}{\b\i\f1 E\'e4rendilyond-}{\i\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 
-UT:8, Letters:386, LT1:250
\par   }{\f1 MARK }{\i\f1 (in writing) }{\b\f1 tehta- }{\f1 (sign, diacritic) }{\i\f1 (In LotR:1155, this word is applied to the supralinear vowel-signs of F\'ebanorian writing, and pl }{\b\i\f1 tehtar }{\i\f1 is attested.) }{\b\f1 sarat }{\i\f1 (pl. }{
\b\i\f1 sarati }{\i\f1 is attested), originally [MET] a word used of "a 'letter' or any individual significant mark", but after the invention of the Tengwar primarily used of the R\'familian letters.}{\f1  TINY MARK }{\b\f1 tix\'eb }{\f1 (dot, point) }{
\i\f1 -TEK/VT39:17, TIK, WJ:396
\par }{\f1  }{\i\f1  }{\f1 MARS }{\b\f1 Carnil }{\i\f1 -Basic Quenya:24, cf. Silm:55}{\f1 
\par   MAST }{\b\f1 ferna }{\f1 (beechnuts), }{\b\f1 tyulma }{\i\f1 -PHER, TYUL/SD:419
\par   }{\f1 MASTER }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 heru}{\f1  (lord), #}{\b\f1 tur }{\i\f1 (cf. }{\b\i\f1 F\'ebanturi }{\i\f1 "Masters of Spirits", a name of the Valar Mandos and Irmo).}{\b\f1  }{\f1 MASTER OF DOOM }{\b\f1 Turambar}{\f1 , MASTER OF DESIRE }{\b\f1 
Irmo }{\i\f1 (lit. "Desirer", the name of a Vala)}{\f1 ; MASTERY }{\b\f1 t\'far\'eb }{\f1 (victory); MASTERED #}{\b\f1 tur\'fana }{\i\f1 (only the form }{\b\i\f1 tur\'fan`}{\i\f1 , with the final *-}{\b\i\f1 a}{\i\f1  elided, is attested. Silm:269 has }{
\b\i\f1 turun }{\i\f1 instead of }{\b\i\f1 tur\'fan`}{\i\f1  - the accent and he elision mark seem to have been omitted.) -KHER, TUR/UT:438, Silm:261/269/423, 405, UT:138
\par   }{\f1 MATRIMONY }{\b\f1 vesta }{\i\f1 -BES
\par   }{\f1 MATTER }{\i\f1 (basic matter:) }{\b\f1 erma}{\f1 ; PHYSICAL MATTER }{\b\f1 orma}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 hroa }{\i\f1 (the latter is also used = "body") -MR:338, 218, 216 
\par   }{\f1 MAVWIN }{\b\f1 Mavoin\'eb }{\i\f1 -LT2:345
\par   }{\f1 MAY }{\b\f1 L\'f3tess\'eb }{\i\f1 (In LT1:252/254, the word for May is }{\b\i\f1 Kalainis}{\i\f1 , but this is hardly a valid word in Tolkien's later Quenya.) -LotR:1144
\par   }{\f1 ME}{\i\f1  The ending }{\b\i\f1 -n}{\i\f1 , attested only as subject, may be employed: }{\b\i\f1 *Ut\'favielyen}{\i\f1 , "thou (}{\b\i\f1 -lye-}{\i\f1 ) hast found me (}{\b\i\f1 -n}{\i\f1 )". It has been theorized that }{\b\i\f1 ni}{\i\f1 
 is the independent word for "me", but actually it seems to be a non-emphatic word for "I" (so in Arct; contrast the emphatic }{\b\i\f1 iny\'eb}{\i\f1 ; see "I"). Case endings may be added to }{\b\i\f1 ni}{\i\f1 , e.g. dative }{\b\i\f1 nin }{\i\f1 
"for me" (Nam).
\par   }{\f1 MEADOW }{\b\f1 - }{\i\f1 LT1:267 (GL:39) gives }{\b\i\f1 lair\'eb}{\i\f1 , but this word already has two different meanings in Tolkien's later Quenya ("summer" and "poem"), so it is somewhat dou
btful whether this word from Tolkien's earliest linguistic constructions remained conceptually valid at the later stages.
\par   }{\f1 MEAL }{\b\f1 por\'eb }{\f1 (flour) }{\i\f1 -POR
\par   }{\f1 MEAN }{\b\f1 faica }{\f1 (contemptible) }{\i\f1 -SPAY
\par   }{\f1 MEASURE }{\b\f1 #lesta }{\i\f1 (only attested in instrumental form }{\b\i\f1 lestanen}{\i\f1  "in measure". Note: #}{\b\i\f1 lesta }{\i\f1 also means "girdle".) -FS
\par   }{\f1 MEAT }{\b\f1 apsa }{\f1 (cooked food) }{\i\f1 -AP
\par   }{\f1 MEED }{\b\f1 m\'edruv\'f3r\'eb }{\f1 (nectar, drink of the Valar) }{\i\f1 -NAM, RGEO:66, 69, LT1:261
\par   }{\f1 MEETING }{\i\f1 (junction of the direction of two persons or groups:) }{\b\f1 omenti\'eb}{\f1 ,}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (of three or more coming from different directions:) }{\b\f1 yomeni\'eb }{\i\f1 -WJ:367, 407, LotR:94
\par   }{\f1 MELIAN }{\b\f1 Melyanna }{\f1 (dear gift) }{\i\f1 -Silm:434
\par   }{\f1 MELODY }{\b\f1 lin }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 lind-}{\f1 ) (musical sound), MELODIOUS }{\b\f1 lindel\'eba}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -LT1:258, cf. LotR:488 and Letters:308       
\par   }{\f1 MEN }{\i\f1 see }{\f1 MAN }{\i\f1 or }{\f1 MORTALS, FOLLOWERS
\par   MENTAL MESSAGE }{\b\f1 sanw\'eb-menta}{\f1  (thought-sending) }{\i\f1 -VT41:5
\par }{\f1   MERCURY }{\i\f1 (the planet, not the metal) }{\b\f1 Elemm\'edr\'eb }{\i\f1 -Basic Quenya}{\f1 :24
\par   MERCHILD }{\b\f1 oar}{\f1  (child of the sea), MERMAID }{\b\f1 oaris}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 oarits-}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 oarwen }{\f1 (prob. *}{\b\f1 oarwend-}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (so in LT1:263 - read }{\b\i\f1 \'ebaris}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 \'ebarwen }{\i\f1 
in Tolkien's later Quenya, since the word for "sea" was altered to }{\b\i\f1 \'ebar}{\i\f1 ?)}{\f1 
\par   MERRIMENT }{\b\f1 alass\'eb }{\f1 (joy) }{\i\f1 -GAL\'c1S}{\f1 
\par   MESSAGE }{\b\f1 menta}{\f1  (sending) }{\i\f1 -VT41:5}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 MESH }{\b\f1 remb\'eb }{\i\f1 -LotR:1149
\par   }{\f1 METAL }{\b\f1 tinco}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 rauta }{\i\f1 -TINK\'d4/LotR:1157, RAUT\'c2
\par   }{\f1 MEWING }{\b\f1 miul\'eb }{\f1 (whining)
\par   MICKLEBURG }{\b\f1 T\'farosto }{\f1 (Belegost) }{\i\f1 -WJ:389}{\f1 
\par   MIDDLE }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 end\'eb }{\f1 (core, centre); MIDDLE }{\i\f1 (prob. adj) }{\b\f1 enya}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 endya }{\i\f1 (In Noldorin Quenya, }{\b\i\f1 enya }{\i\f1 would be the natural form - }{\b\i\f1 endya }{\i\f1 
looks like Vanyarin Quenya. Cf. the name of the language itself in the two dialects, }{\b\i\f1 Quenya }{\i\f1 vs. }{\b\i\f1 Quendya}{\i\f1 .) }{\f1 MIDDLE-DAY #}{\b\f1 ender\'eb}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 (only pl }{\b\i\f1 enderi }{\i\f1 is attested; for sg }{
\b\i\f1 #ender\'eb }{\i\f1 cf. }{\b\i\f1 yestar\'eb}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 mettar\'eb}{\i\f1 , the first and the last day of the year. The "middle-days" were three days inserted between the months of y\'e1vi\'eb and quell\'eb in the Calendar of Imladris.)}{
\f1  }{\i\f1 -\'c9NED, cf. WJ:361, LotR:1142
\par   }{\f1 MIDDLE-EARTH }{\b\f1 End\'f3r\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Endor }{\i\f1 (defined as "centre of the world" under \'c9NED; allative form }{\b\i\f1 Endorenna }{\i\f1 is attested in LotR. Other names are also glossed "Middle-earth": }{\b\i\f1 Ambarenya}{\i\f1 
, }{\b\i\f1 Endamar}{\i\f1 ; see also EAST) -LotR:1003, \'c9NED, MBAR
\par   }{\f1 MIGHTY }{\b\f1 taura}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 pold\'f3r\'eba }{\i\f1 (a title of Tulkas);}{\b\f1  }{\f1 MIGHTY-RISING }{\b\f1 Melk\'f3r\'eb }{\f1 (> }{\b\f1 Melkor}{\f1 ) (uprising of Power), THE MIGHTY }{\b\f1 Melko }{\i\f1 (an alternative form of }{
\b\i\f1 Melkor}{\i\f1 , derived from an unattested adjective *}{\b\i\f1 melka}{\i\f1 , *}{\b\i\f1 melca }{\i\f1 "mighty", with connotations of violence.)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -TUR, LT1:264/GL:64, MR:350
\par   }{\f1 MILCH COW}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 yax\'eb}{\f1 . (An alternative form }{\b\f1 yaxi}{\f1 , glossed "cow", looks like a plural in LotR-style Quenya, unless it connects with the few other feminine forms in -}{\b\f1 i}{\f1 , like }{\b\f1 t\'e1ri}{\f1 
 "queen".) -}{\i\f1 GL:36
\par   }{\f1 MIND }{\b\f1 s\'e1ma}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 s\'e1mar}{\i\f1  is given)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 indo }{\f1 (heart, mood), }{\i\f1 (inner mind:) }{\b\f1 \'f3r\'eb }{\f1 (heart) }{\i\f1 (Note: a homophone means "rising")}{\f1 ; MIND-MOOD }{\b\f1 inwisti
}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -VT39:23, MR:216, LotR:1157, MR:229
\par   }{\f1 MINISTER }{\b\f1 arandur }{\f1 (king's servant, steward) }{\i\f1 -Letters:386, UT:313}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 MISERY }{\b\f1 angayass\'eb }{\i\f1 -LT1:249
\par   }{\f1 MIST }{\b\f1 h\'edsi\'eb }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 h\'eds\'eb }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (fog. }{\i\f1 Note: a homophone means "dusk". For "mist" use }{\b\i\f1 h\'edsi\'eb}{\i\f1 , the form occurring in LotR.}{\f1 ) }{
\i\f1 -Nam/RGEO:67, KHIS
\par   }{\f1 MOAT }{\i\f1 see}{\f1  WALL AND MOAT}{\i\f1 
\par   }{\f1 MOCKING }{\b\f1 yaiw\'eb }{\f1 (scorn) }{\i\f1 -YAY
\par   }{\f1 MOIST }{\b\f1 n\'edt\'eb }{\f1 (dewy) }{\i\f1 -NEI
\par }{\f1   MOLE }{\b\f1 noldar\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 nolpa}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -GL:30
\par   }{\f1 MONSTER }{\b\f1 ulundo}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 \'favanimo }{\f1 (creature of Melkor. }{\i\f1 In LT1:236, }{\b\i\f1 \'davanimor }{\i\f1 are said to be "monsters, giants, and ogres". See also ORC.)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -\'daLUG, BAN/LT1:272
\par   }{\f1 MONTH }{\b\f1 #asta }{\i\f1 (only pl }{\b\i\f1 astar}{\i\f1  is attested)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -LotR:1142
\par   }{\f1 MOOD }{\b\f1 indo }{\f1 (heart, mind) }{\i\f1 -ID
\par   }{\f1 MOON }{\b\f1 Isil}{\f1  (-}{\i\f1 th}{\f1 -), }{\b\f1 R\'e1na }{\i\f1 (so in Silm and UT; Etym has }{\b\i\f1 Rana}{\i\f1  with a short }{\b\i\f1 a}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 , CRESCENT MOON }{\b\f1 c\'fa }{\f1 (bow), MOONLIGHT }{\b\f1 isilm\'eb }{\i\f1 
-I/THIL/LotR:1148, Silm:436/UT:242, RAN, LT1:271, MC:222, 223
\par   }{\f1 MORGOTH }{\b\f1 Moringotto }{\i\f1 (the oldest [MET] form was }{\b\i\f1 Mori\'f1gotho}{\i\f1 ) }{\f1 (Black Foe) }{\i\f1 -MR:194
\par   }{\f1 MORN }{\i\f1 (early) }{\b\f1 artuil\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tuil\'eb }{\i\f1 (the latter is also used in the sense "springtime") -TUY}{\f1 
\par   MORNING }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 arin}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (LT1:254 gives }{\b\i\f1 c\'e1l\'eb}{\i\f1 , but this word means "light" in later writings)}{\f1 , MORNING }{\i\f1 (used as adj?) }{\b\f1 arinya }{\f1 (early) }{\i\f1 -AR}{\i\f1\fs12 1
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 MORTAL }{\b\f1 f\'edrima }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 F\'edrimar }{\i\f1 is attested, lit. "those apt to die", WJ:387)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Firya }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 Firyar }{\i\f1 is attested)}{\f1 ; MORTAL MAN }{\b\f1 fir\'eb }{\i\f1 (pl }{
\b\i\f1 firi }{\i\f1 is given but seems perfectly regular) -PHIR, WJ:387
\par   }{\f1 MOTHER }{\b\f1 amil}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 amm\'eb}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 (hypocoristic, = *"mom":) }{\b\f1 nana}{\f1 . MOTHER-NAME (OF INSIGHT) #}{\b\f1 amiless\'eb }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 tercenya}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 
(i.e., names given by Elvish mothers to their children, indicating some dominant feature of the nature of the child as perceived by its mother. Only pl }{\b\i\f1 amilessi terceny\'eb }{\i\f1 is attested.)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -AM}{\i\f1\fs12 1}{\i\f1 
, NAN, MR:217
\par   }{\f1 MOUND }{\b\f1 coron}{\i\f1 , }{\b\f1 hahta }{\f1 (pile), }{\b\f1 cumb\'eb }{\f1 (heap), }{\b\f1 tundo }{\f1 (hill) }{\i\f1 -Sil:429, KHAG, KUB, TUN
\par   }{\f1 MOUNTAIN }{\b\f1 oron}{\f1  (pl }{\b\f1 oronti}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (also used = }{\f1 "mount", e.g. }{\b\f1 Oron Oioloss\'eb }{\f1 "Mount Everwhite"), MOUNTAIN-PEAK }{\b\f1 aicass\'eb}{\f1 ; MOUNTAIN-TOP }{\b\f1 orto}{\f1 ; MOUNTAIN PASS }{\b\f1 falqua
}{\i\f1  }{\f1 (cleft, ravine), MOUNTAIN-DWELLING }{\i\f1 (adj) }{\b\f1 orofarn\'eb }{\i\f1 (pl? Sg *}{\b\i\f1 orofarna}{\i\f1 ?) -\'d3ROT/WJ:403, AYAK, LT2:341, LotR:505 cf. Letters:224
\par   }{\f1 MOUTH }{\b\f1 anto}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 p\'e9}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (but }{\b\i\f1 p\'e9}{\i\f1  is glossed "lip" in a late source, see VT39:9)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 assa }{\f1 (hole, opening, perforation), }{\b\f1 n\'e1va}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("\'f1")}{\f1 
 (not only the lips but also the inside of the mouth - this word was apparently changed by Tolkien from }{\b\f1 p\'e1va}{\f1 ), MOUTH OF RIVER }{\b\f1 etsir}{\f1 , WITH MOUTH FULL (= full to the brim) }{\b\f1 penquanta}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
-LotR:1157, PEG, GAS, VT39:13 cf. 8, 19, ET, VT39:11}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 MOVE }{\i\f1 (intr., of large and heavy things:) }{\b\f1 r\'fama- }{\i\f1 (part. }{\b\i\f1 r\'famala }{\i\f1 is attested) }{\f1 (shift, heave) }{\i\f1 -MC:223, 222
\par   }{\f1 MURK }{\b\f1 hui }{\f1 (fog, dark, night), MURKY }{\b\f1 huiva}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -LT1:253
\par   }{\f1 MURMUR }{\b\f1 nurru- }{\f1 (grumble) }{\i\f1 -MC:223
\par }{\b\f1   }{\f1 MUSCLE }{\b\f1 tuo }{\f1 (sinew, strength) }{\i\f1 -TUG
\par   }{\f1 MUSIC #}{\b\f1 lindal\'eb }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 Ainulindal\'eb }{\i\f1 "The Music of the Ainur"; Etym and LT1:258 has }{\b\i\f1 lindel\'eb}{\i\f1 ; the latter is also glossed "song".)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -Silm:378, LIN
\par   }{\f1 MY}{\b\f1 -nya }{\i\f1 (possessive suffix, e.g. }{\b\i\f1 *aldanya }{\i\f1 "my tree". An }{\b\i\f1 i }{\i\f1 seems to be inserted between the ending and the noun when the latter ends in a consonant: }{\b\i\f1 atarinya }{\i\f1 
"my father" (LR:61). If the last consonant(s) of the noun is }{\b\i\f1 n }{\i\f1 or the cluster }{\b\i\f1 nd}{\i\f1 , a contracted form may be used in vocatives: }{\b\i\f1 hinya }{\i\f1 "my child" (for }{\b\i\f1 h\'ednanya}{\i\f1 , WJ:403), }{\b\i\f1 
yonya }{\i\f1 "my son" (for }{\b\i\f1 *yondonya}{\i\f1 , LR:61).
\par   
\par }{\b\f1\fs24   <N>}{\f1 
\par   NAIL }{\i\f1 (prob. noun) }{\b\f1 tax\'eb }{\i\f1 -TAK
\par   }{\f1 NAKED }{\b\f1 helda }{\i\f1 -SKEL
\par   }{\f1 NAME }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 ess\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 essi }{\i\f1 is attested. Note: the word }{\b\i\f1 ess\'eb}{\i\f1  was also used in the sense "person as a whole", body and soul.)}{\f1  AFTER-NAME }{\b\f1 epess\'eb }{\i\f1 
(i.e., "a nickname - mostly given as a title of admiration or honour")}{\f1 ; MOTHER-NAME (OF INSIGHT) #}{\b\f1 amiless\'eb }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 tercenya}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 
(i.e. names given by Elvish mothers to their children, indicating some dominant feature of the nature of the child as perceived by its mother. Only pl }{\b\i\f1 amilessi terceny\'eb }{\i\f1 is attested.) }{\f1 NAME OF INSIGHT #}{\b\f1 ess\'eb tercenya }{
\i\f1 (i.e., the same as "mother-name"; only pl }{\b\i\f1 essi terceny\'eb }{\i\f1 is attested); }{\f1 GIVEN (OR ADDED) NAME }{\b\f1 aness\'eb }{\i\f1 (pl }{\b\i\f1 anessi }{\i\f1 is attested. This word}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 
encompasses both "after-names" and "mother-names".) }{\f1 NAME-MAKING }{\b\f1 Essecarm\'eb }{\i\f1 (an Eldarin seremony in which the father of a child announces its name)}{\f1 , NAME-CHOOSING }{\b\f1 Essecilm\'eb }{\i\f1 
(an Eldarin seremony in which a person chooses a name according to his or her personal }{\b\i\f1 l\'e1maty\'e1v\'eb }{\i\f1 or sound-taste); }{\f1 SELF-NAME #}{\b\f1 cilmess\'eb }{\i\f1 (only pl. }{\b\i\f1 cilmessi }{\i\f1 is attested}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 
said to mean more literally "names of personal choice":}{\f1  }{\b\i\f1 #cilm\'eb }{\i\f1 "choice" + }{\b\i\f1 essi }{\i\f1 
"names". PM:339 explains that "some among the exiles gave themselves names, as disguises or in reference to their own deeds and personal history: such names were called }{\f1 kilmessi }{\i\f1 'self-names'.") -ES/LotR:1157/MR:216, UT:266, MR:217, 214

\par }{\f1   NARRATIVE }{\b\f1 quenta}{\f1  (story, history) }{\i\f1 -KWET/VT39:16}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 NARRATOR }{\b\f1 quentaro }{\i\f1 -KWET
\par   }{\f1 NARROW }{\b\f1 arca}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 lenwa }{\f1 (long and thin, straight) NARROW NECK }{\b\f1 yatta }{\f1 (isthmus); NARROW PATH }{\b\f1 axa}{\f1 ; NARROW PROMONTORY }{\b\f1 neht\'eb }{\f1 (spear-head, gore, wedge) }{\i\f1 
-AK, LT2:341, YAK, UT:282                   
\par   }{\f1 NASAL }{\b\f1 nengw\'eba }{\i\f1 -NE\'d1-WI
\par }{\f1   NATION }{\b\f1 n\'f3r\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 -nor }{\f1 (land, country, dwelling-place, native land, family) }{\i\f1 -LT1:272}{\f1  
\par   NATIVE LAND }{\b\f1 n\'f3r\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 -nor }{\f1 (land, country, dwelling-place, nation, family) }{\i\f1 -LT1:272}{\f1  
\par   NATURE }{\b\f1 \'eba}{\f1  (universe). This term "was not held to include [}{\i\f1 illegible word:}{\f1  souls?] and spirits" -}{\i\f1 VT39:20}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 NAZG\'dbL }{\b\f1 \'dalairi }{\f1 (Ring-wraiths) }{\i\f1 (pl; sg }{\b\i\f1 #\'dalair\'eb}{\i\f1 ?) -Silm:362, 417}{\f1 
\par   NEAR }{\b\f1 har}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 har\'eb }{\i\f1 -LT1:253
\par   }{\f1 NECK }{\b\f1 yat }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 yaht-}{\f1 ); NARROW NECK }{\b\f1 yatta }{\f1 (isthmus) }{\i\f1 -YAK
\par   }{\f1 NECKLACE }{\b\f1 firinga }{\f1 (carnanet) }{\i\f1 -LT2:346, GL:36
\par   }{\f1 NECTAR }{\b\f1 m\'edruv\'f3r\'eb }{\f1 (meed, drink of the Valar) }{\i\f1 -Nam, RGEO:66, LT1:260
\par   }{\f1 NEED }{\i\f1 (prob. noun)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 maur\'eb }{\i\f1 -MBAW
\par   }{\f1 NEPTUNE }{\b\f1 N\'e9nar }{\i\f1 (or less probably }{\b\i\f1 Luinil}{\i\f1 ; it is not known for certain which of the two is Neptune and which is Uranus) -Basic Quenya:24, Silm:55 
\par   }{\f1 NET }{\b\f1 nats\'eb }{\f1 (web) }{\i\f1 -NAT
\par   }{\f1 NEW }{\b\f1 vinya }{\f1 (cf. }{\b\f1 Vinyamar}{\f1  "New Dwelling", }{\b\f1 Vinyalond\'eb }{\f1 "New Haven"), }{\b\f1 sinya}{\f1 . NEW LIFE }{\b\f1 laito}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 laisi }{\f1 (vigour, youth) }{\i\f1 -Silm:425, UT:471, SIN, LT1:267
\par   }{\f1 NEXT }{\b\f1 ento }{\f1 -}{\i\f1 Arct
\par   }{\f1 NICKNAME }{\i\f1 ("mostly given as a title of admiration or honour") }{\b\f1 epess\'eb }{\f1 (after-name) }{\i\f1 -UT:266}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 
\par   }{\f1 NIGHT }{\b\f1 l\'f3m\'eb}{\f1 , ("Night, night-time, [shades of night]", }{\i\f1 in LT1:255 glossed "dusk, gloom, darkness"}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 Fui}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Hui }{\f1 ("Night" }{\i\f1 - in LT1:253, }{\b\i\f1 hui }{\i\f1 
is glossed "fog, dark, murk, night"}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 l\'f3 }{\f1 ("night, a night"), }{\b\f1 m\'f3r\'eb}{\f1  (blackness, dark }{\i\f1 - obsoleting }{\b\i\f1 mori }{\i\f1 in LT1:260}{\f1 ). }{\i\f1 In Valinorean usage, }{\b\i\f1 l\'f3m\'eb }{\i\f1 
"has no evil connotations; it is a word of peace and beauty and has none of the associations of fear and groping that, say, 'dark' has to us. For the evil sense I [Tolkien's character Lowdham] do not know the [Quenya] word". For "night" in the "evil sense
", }{\b\i\f1 m\'f3r\'eb }{\i\f1 seems to be the best candidate. Yet }{\b\i\f1 l\'f3m\'eb }{\i\f1 evidently developed darker connotations among the Exiles, for when crying }{\b\i\f1 auta i l\'f3m\'eb }{\i\f1 
"the night is passing" before the Nirnaeth Arnoediad, the Noldor used the word metaphorically to mean the rule of Morgoth. -DO3, PHUY, SD:306, Silm:229 
\par   }{\f1 NIGHTINGALE }{\b\f1 l\'f3melind\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (pl }{\b\i\f1 l\'f3melindi }{\i\f1 is attested; Etym also has }{\b\i\f1 morilind\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tind\'f3merel }{\i\f1 
("daughter of twilight", a kenning of or a poetic name for the nightingale; the Sindarin equivalent is }{\b\i\f1 tin\'faviel}{\i\f1 . Tolkien changed the mea
ning of the final element from "daughter" to "child", see SEL-D-.) -DO3, Silm:64, MOR, TIN/Silm:422, 438
\par   }{\f1 NINE }{\b\f1 nert\'eb }{\i\f1 (obsoleting }{\b\i\f1 olma }{\i\f1 in LT1:258) -N\'c9TER
\par   }{\f1 NO }{\b\f1 l\'e1 }{\i\f1 (also meaning "not"}{\f1 . }{\b\i\f1 L\'e1 }{\i\f1 is probably used to deny }{\f1 facts}{\i\f1 , or what others present as facts. In some contexts, the interjection }{\b\i\f1 v\'e1}{\i\f1 
 is to be preferred. It is derived from a stem that "expressed }{\f1 refusal }{\i\f1 to do what others might wish or urge, or }{\f1 prohibition }{\i\f1 of some action by others.}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 Cf also}{\f1  }{\b\f1 lala, lau}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 laum\'eb }{\f1 
"no, no indeed not, on the contrary; also used for asking incredulous questions". }{\i\f1 Prefixes "no-, un-": }{\b\f1 \'fa-}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 il}{\f1 -. SAY NO }{\b\f1 v\'e1quet- }{\f1 (forbid, refuse) }{\i\f1 (1st pers. sg aorist and past }{\b\i\f1 v\'e1
quetin}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 v\'e1quenten }{\i\f1 are given)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ava- }{\f1 (refuse)}{\i\f1  (pa.t. }{\b\i\f1 avan\'eb }{\i\f1 is given; this verb was "little used in ordinary language").}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -LA, WJ:371 cf. 370, G\'db, WJ:370, KWET

\par   }{\f1 NO LONGER TO BE HAD }{\b\f1 vanwa }{\f1 (gone, dead, departed, lost, past, vanished) }{\i\f1 -WJ:366
\par   }{\f1 NOBLE }{\i\f1 (a noble:) }{\b\f1 arquen }{\i\f1 The element #}{\b\i\f1 ar- }{\i\f1 in }{\b\i\f1 Arfanyarass\'eb }{\i\f1 (a name of Taniquetil) is said to mean "high (i.e., noble, revered). }{\b\i\f1 Arquen }{\i\f1 is simply #}{\b\i\f1 ar }{\i\f1 
"noble" + }{\b\i\f1 quen }{\i\f1 "person". }{\f1 NOBLE WOMAN (one of Galadriel's names) }{\b\f1 Artanis}{\f1 .}{\i\f1  -WJ:372, WJ:416, PM:347
\par   }{\f1 NOGROD }{\b\f1 N\'e1varot }{\f1 (Hollowbold, Novrod) }{\i\f1 -WJ:389
\par   }{\f1 NOISE }{\b\f1 ran}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 roaring noise }{\b\f1 r\'e1v\'eb}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 (noise of a) storm }{\b\f1 raumo }{\i\f1 -LT1:259, MC:223
\par   }{\f1 NOLDORIN }{\b\f1 Noldorin }{\i\f1 (= the language of the Noldor)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Noldorinwa }{\i\f1 (= general adjective)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -WJ:20, LR:201
\par   }{\f1 NOMAN }{\b\i\f1 \'daner }{\i\f1 -UT:211
\par   }{\f1 NORMAL }{\b\f1 sanya }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (regular, law-abiding) }{\i\f1 -STAN
\par   }{\f1 NORTH }{\b\f1 Formen}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 fort\'eb }{\f1 (right); NORTHERN }{\b\f1 formenya}{\f1 ; NORTHLANDS}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (a region in N\'famenor)}{\b\f1  Forostar }{\i\f1 -PHOR, LotR:1157, UT:165, 439
\par   }{\f1 NOSE }{\b\f1 nengw\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 mundo }{\f1 (snout, cape) }{\i\f1 (Note: the latter word also means "ox") -NE\'d1-WI, MBUD
\par   }{\f1 NOT }{\b\f1 l\'e1}{\f1  (as for }{\i\f1 not}{\f1 - as a prefix = }{\i\f1 un}{\f1 -, see below). NO INDEED NOT }{\b\f1 lala}{\f1 ;}{\i\f1  }{\f1 DON'T }{\b\f1 \'e1va}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 av\'e1}{\f1 ; DON'T DO IT! }{\b\f1 \'e1va car\'eb!}{\f1 
; I WILL NOT}{\i\f1 : }{\b\f1 v\'e1 }{\i\f1 (exclamation, also =}{\f1  Do not!); }{\b\f1 avan}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 v\'e1n}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 vany\'eb }{\f1 "I won't", }{\b\f1 avamm\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 vamm\'eb }{\f1 "we won't"; NOT COUNTING }{\b\f1 hequa }{\f1 
(leaving aside, excluding, except), NOT COUNTED }{\b\f1 unot\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 unot\'eba}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (read *}{\b\i\f1 \'fanot\'eb}{\i\f1 , *}{\b\i\f1 \'fanot\'eba}{\i\f1 ?)}{\f1  (uncounted), NOT TO BE SAID, THAT MUST NOT BE SAID }{\b\f1 avaqu\'e9tima}
{\f1 , NOT TO BE TOLD OR RELATED }{\b\f1 avany\'e1rima}{\f1  -}{\i\f1 LA, WJ:371, 364/365, VT39:14, WJ:370}{\f1 
\par   NOT- }{\i\f1 (prefix denying presence or possession of thing or quality)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 \'fa}{\f1 - (in-, un-). }{\i\f1 -VT39:14; according to LR:396 s.v. UGU, this prefix usually has a "bad sense", cf. }{\b\i\f1 vanimor}{\i\f1  "fair folk" vs. }{
\b\i\f1 \'favanimor}{\i\f1  "monsters"}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 NOVEMBER }{\b\f1 H\'edsim\'eb }{\i\f1 -LotR:1144
\par   }{\f1 NOVROD }{\b\f1 N\'e1varot }{\f1 (Hollowbold, Nogrod) }{\i\f1 -WJ:389
\par }{\f1   NOW }{\b\f1 s\'ed}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 s\'edn}{\f1 /}{\b\f1 sin }{\i\f1 (the latter form is evidently used when the next word has an initial vowel; cf. the distribution of "a" and "an" in English.) -SI, cf. LR:47
\par   }{\f1 NUMBER }{\b\f1 n\'f3t\'eb}{\f1 , LARGE NUMBER }{\b\f1 hosta}{\f1 , IN A VERY GREAT NUMBER }{\b\f1 \'fav\'eba}{\f1 ; NUMBERLESS}{\b\f1  \'fan\'f3tima}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 \'fan\'f3tim\'eb}{\i\f1  attested)}{\f1  (uncountable, countless) }{
\i\f1 -NOT, KHOTH, UB, Nam/VT39:14}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 NUMEROUS }{\b\f1 rimba }{\f1 (frequent)
\par   NYMPH }{\b\f1 wingil}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 wingild-}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (pl }{\b\i\f1 WIngildi }{\i\f1 is attested)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 falmar}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 falmarin }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 falmarind-}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (Writers should use }{\b\i\f1 falmarin }{\i\f1 rather than }{
\b\i\f1 falmar}{\i\f1 , thus avoiding any possible confusion with }{\b\i\f1 falmar }{\i\f1 "waves".) -WIG/LT1:273, PHAL
\par   
\par }{\b\f1\fs24   <O>}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 O }{\i\f1 (vocative particle) }{\b\f1 a -}{\i\f1 LotR:1017 cf. Letters:308 }{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1   OAK }{\b\f1 norno}{\f1 ; HAVING MANY OAK-TREES }{\b\f1 lindorn\'eba }{\i\f1 -D\'d3RON, LIN
\par   }{\f1 OATH }{\b\f1 v\'e9r\'eb}{\f1  (bond, troth, compact. }{\i\f1 Pl. probably *}{\b\i\f1 v\'e9rer}{\i\f1  not }{\b\i\f1 *v\'e9ri}{\i\f1 ; cf. the similar formation }{\b\i\f1 ty\'e1v\'eb }{\i\f1 "taste", pl }{\b\i\f1 ty\'e1ver}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 vanda }{
\f1 (pledge, solemn promise) }{\i\f1 -WED, UT:317
\par   }{\f1 OBLIGED }{\b\f1 nauta }{\f1 (bound) }{\i\f1 -NUT
\par   }{\f1 OBSCURE }{\b\f1 nulla }{\f1 (dark, dusky) OBSCURITY }{\b\f1 mordo }{\f1 (shadow, stain) }{\i\f1 -NDUL, MOR
\par  }{\f1  OBSERVE - }{\i\f1 use the word glossed "watch, heed", q.v. Cf. LT1:258.}{\f1 
\par   OCCASION }{\b\f1 l\'fa }{\f1 (a time) }{\i\f1 -LU
\par   }{\f1 OCEAN The Great Ocean }{\b\f1 Alatair\'eb}{\f1 , The Outer Ocean }{\b\f1 Vai }{\i\f1 (=Ekkaia?) -AYAR, LT1:271
\par   }{\f1 OCTOBER }{\b\f1 Narqueli\'eb }{\i\f1 -LotR:1144/1146
\par   }{\f1 ODOUR }{\b\f1 holm\'eb }{\i\f1 -\'d1OL
\par   }{\f1 OFF }{\b\f1 au- }{\i\f1 (verbal prefix implying motion "away from the speaker or the place of his thought", as in }{\b\i\f1 auciri- }{\i\f1 "cut off, so that a portion is lost or no longer available")}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 h\'f3- }{\i\f1 
(verbal prefix implying motion away from something, but the point of view is outside the thing left: cf. }{\b\i\f1 h\'f3ciri- }{\i\f1 "cut off a required portion, so as to have it or use it") -WJ:365, 366, 368}{\f1 
\par   OGRE }{\b\f1 \'davanimo }{\i\f1 (see MONSTER). }{\f1 CANNIBAL-OGRES }{\b\f1 Sarquindi }{\f1 (sg #}{\b\f1 Sarquind\'eb}{\f1 ?) }{\i\f1 -LT1:236 cf. BAN, LT2:347 }{\f1 
\par   OINTMENT }{\b\f1 laiv\'eb }{\i\f1 -LIB
\par   }{\f1 OLD }{\b\f1 enwina}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 linyenwa }{\f1 (having many years), }{\i\f1 (of things:) }{\b\f1 yerna }{\f1 (worn); OLDEN }{\b\f1 y\'e1r\'eba}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 yal\'fam\'eba}{\f1 , GET OLD }{\b\f1 yerya}{\f1 - (wear [out]) }{\i\f1 
-MC:222 cf. 215, YEN, GYER
\par   }{\f1 OMINOUS }{\b\f1 lumna }{\f1 (lying heavy, burdensome, oppressive) }{\i\f1 -DUB}{\f1 
\par   OMNIFICENT }{\b\f1 ilucara}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (VT39:20)}{\f1 
\par   OMNIPOTENT }{\b\f1 iluvala}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (VT39:20)}{\f1 
\par   OMNISCIENT }{\b\f1 iluisa}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (VT39:20)}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 ON }{\b\f1 or }{\i\f1 (so in LT1:256, but in LotR-style Quenya }{\b\i\f1 or }{\i\f1 is always translated "over". English "on" may be rendered by the allative case, see UPON.)
\par   }{\f1 ONCE UPON A TIME }{\b\f1 yass\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 yal\'famess\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 y\'e1ress\'eb }{\i\f1 (Note: the first of these seems to clash with }{\b\i\f1 *yass\'eb }{\i\f1 "in/on which". Writers should use one of the two al
ternative forms.) -YA
\par   }{\f1 ONE }{\b\f1 min\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (obsoleting }{\b\i\f1 mir }{\i\f1 in LT1:260)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 er }{\f1 (only, one, alone, but, still); ONE }{\i\f1 (= a person, someone) }{\b\f1 qu\'e9n}{\f1  pl }{\b\f1 queni }{\i\f1 (unstressed }{\b\i\f1 quen}{
\i\f1 , "as a pronoun or final element in a compound")}{\f1 ; THE ONE }{\b\f1 Eru }{\i\f1 (see }{\f1 GOD}{\i\f1 ) -MINI, ERE, WJ:361 cf. 360, Silm:15, 431
\par   }{\f1 ONLY }{\b\f1 eress\'eb }{\f1 (singly, alone, }{\i\f1 also as noun = }{\f1 solitude) }{\i\f1 -ERE, LT1:269
\par   }{\f1 OPEN }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 panta- }{\f1 (unfurl, spread out); OPEN WIDE }{\b\f1 palu-}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 palya- }{\f1 (extend); OPEN }{\i\f1 (adj) }{\b\f1 panta}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 l\'e1ta}{\f1  ("open, not closed", VT41:5); }{\i\f1 (of land:) }{\b\f1 latin
}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 latina }{\f1 (free, cleared); OPENING }{\b\f1 assa }{\f1 (hole, performation, mouth), }{\b\f1 latya}{\f1  (used as an abstract in the source), OPENNESS }{\b\f1 l\'e1ti\'eb}{\f1 ; OPENMOUTHED }{\b\f1 fauca }{\f1 (thirsty, parched) }{\i\f1 
-PAT, PAL, VT39:23, LAT, GAS, VT39:23/VT41:5, PHAU
\par   }{\f1 OPPRESSIVE }{\b\f1 lumna }{\f1 (lying heavy, burdensome, ominous) }{\i\f1 -DUB}{\f1 
\par   OR }{\i\f1 (conjunction)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 var}{\f1  -}{\i\f1 QL:100}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 ORANGE }{\b\f1 culuina }{\i\f1 (colour)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 culuma }{\i\f1 (fruit) -KUL
\par   }{\f1 ORC}{\i\f1  (goblin)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 urco}{\f1  (pl }{\b\f1 urqui}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 or}{\f1  }{\b\f1 orco }{\f1 (pl.}{\b\f1  orqui }{\f1 or }{\b\f1 orcor}{\f1 )}{\i\f1  (LT1:264 has }{\b\i\f1 orc}{\i\f1 , but word-final }{\b\i\f1 rc }{\i\f1 
does not occur in LotR-style Quenya. Here the gloss is "monster, demon". Cf. WJ:390: "In the lore of the Blessed Realm the Q }{\b\i\f1 urko }{\i\f1 
naturally seldom occurs, except in tales of the ancient days and the March, and then is vague in meaning, referring to anything that caused fear to the Elves, any dubious shape or shadow, or prowling creature.") -\'d3ROK, LT1:264, WJ:390
\par   }{\f1 ORDAINER }{\b\f1 N\'e1mo }{\f1 (Judge - }{\i\f1 the name of a Vala}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 -Silm:411
\par   }{\f1 ORDER }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 heren}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (}{\b\i\f1 Heren Istarion}{\i\f1  "Order of Wizards")}{\f1 ; ORDER }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 vala- }{\i\f1 (used of the Valar only, as in }{\b\i\f1 \'e1 vala Manw\'eb }{\i\f1 "may Manw\'eb order it", }{
\b\i\f1 Valar valuvar }{\i\f1 "the will of the Valar will be done", *"the Valar will order [it]". -UT:388, WJ:404
\par   }{\f1 ORIENT }{\b\f1 ambaron }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 ambar\'f3n}{\f1 -), }{\b\f1 Ambar\'f3n\'eb }{\i\f1 (a similar but untranslated word, }{\b\i\f1 Ambar\'f3na}{\i\f1 , occurs in LotR) -AM}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 , LotR:490
\par   }{\f1 ORIGINATE }{\b\f1 auta- }{\f1 (invent, devise) }{\i\f1 -GAWA
\par   }{\f1 ORION }{\b\f1 Telumehtar }{\i\f1 ("warrior of the sky", according to WJ:411 an old name, later [MET] evidently replaced by:)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 Menelmacar }{\i\f1 ("Swordsman of the Sky") -TEL, WJ:411, LotR:1147 cf. 95  
\par   }{\f1 OUR *}{\b\f1 -mma}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (pronominal ending used on verbs, e.g. }{\b\i\f1 *aldamma }{\i\f1 "our tree". It is not attested, but may be deduced from the word for
 "we", q.v. This "our" is exclusive, meaning "their and my", not including the person(s) that is spoken to. The inclusive ending for "your and our" is *}{\f1 -}{\b\f1 lma}{\i\f1 , or in the dual }{\b\f1 -lva}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 
("our" meaning "your (sg) and mine", as in }{\b\i\f1 omentielvo }{\i\f1 "of our [Frodo's and Gildor's] meeting, LotR:94). In the first edition of LotR, the wrong form }{\b\i\f1 omentielmo }{\i\f1 
is used (plural instead of dual). The ending for dual exclusive "our" (sc. "our" meaning "his/her and mine") is unknown. The emphatic, independent words for "our" may be *}{\b\i\f1 emma}{\i\f1 , *}{\b\i\f1 elma}{\f1 , *}{\b\i\f1 elva}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
 -LotR:94, cf. Letters:447
\par   }{\f1 OUT }{\b\f1 et- }{\i\f1 (prefix)}{\b\i\f1  }{\f1 (forth), OUT OF }{\b\f1 et }{\i\f1 (followed by ablative)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -ET, LotR:1003
\par   }{\f1 OUTCAST }{\b\f1 hecil}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (gender-spesific forms are }{\b\i\f1 hecilo }{\i\f1 m. and }{\b\i\f1 hecil\'eb }{\i\f1 f.) }{\f1 (one lost or forsaken by friends, waif, outlaw) }{\i\f1 -WJ:365
\par   }{\f1 OUTER, OUTERMOST }{\b\f1 er\'fam\'eba }{\i\f1 -LT1:262}{\b\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 OUTER LANDS }{\b\f1 Entar}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Entarda }{\f1 (Middle-earth, East, Thither Lands }{\i\f1 [as seen from Valinor]}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 ettel\'eb }{\i\f1 (the word is not capitalized and seems to be sg)}{\f1 ; OUTER OCEAN }{\b\f1 Vai }{
\i\f1 (= Ekkaia?) -ET, LT1:271}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
\par   }{\f1 OUTLAW }{\b\f1 hecil}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (gender-spesific forms are }{\b\i\f1 hecilo }{\i\f1 m. and }{\b\i\f1 hecil\'eb }{\i\f1 f.) }{\f1 (one lost or forsaken by friends, waif, outcast) }{\i\f1 -WJ:365}{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1   OUTSIDE }{\b\f1 ara }{\f1 (beside), }{\b\f1 ava}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ett\'eb}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 (prefix:) }{\b\f1 ar- }{\f1 (e.g. }{\b\f1 Araman }{\f1 "outside Aman")}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -AR}{\i\f1\fs12 2}{\i\f1 ; AWA, ET, Silm:428
\par   }{\f1 OVEN }{\b\f1 urna }{\i\f1 -LT1:271
\par  }{\f1  OVER }{\b\f1 or}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 For "over" in the sense }{\f1 past}{\i\f1 , see PAST AND OVER. -UT:305
\par   }{\f1 OVERCAST }{\b\f1 l\'far\'eba }{\f1 (dark) }{\i\f1 -LT1:259
\par   }{\f1 OVERSHADOW }{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 telta- }{\f1 (canopy, screen)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -TEL
\par   }{\f1 OX }{\b\f1 mundo }{\i\f1 (Note: a homophone means "snout, nose, cape". It may or may not obsolete the form }{\b\i\f1 taracu }{\i\f1 "ox" in LT2.) See also BULL. -Letters:422, LT2:347/GL:69
\par   }{\f1 OXFORD - }{\i\f1 LT2 gives }{\b\i\f1 Taruktarna }{\i\f1 (read *}{\b\i\f1 Taruhtarna }{\i\f1 in LotR-style Quenya), but the word may not be conceptually valid in LotR-style Quenya. See OX above. -LT2:347}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 
\par     
\par }{\b\f1\fs24   <P>}{\f1 
\par   PACE }{\b\f1 ranga }{\i\f1 (pl }{\b\i\f1 rangar }{\i\f1 is stated to mean "full paces"). The }{\b\i\f1 ranga }{\i\f1 was a N\'famen\'f3rean linear measure of approximately 38 inches (96.5 cm); see }{\f1 YARD. }{\i\f1 -UT:285}{\f1 
\par   PAGAN GOD }{\i\f1 see GOD
\par   }{\f1 PAIN }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 nwalya-}{\b\i\f1  }{\f1 (torment). }{\i\f1 (Though spelt this way also in Etym, }{\b\i\f1 nwalya- }{\i\f1 must be from older *}{\b\i\f1 ngwalya}{\i\f1 , for the stem is }{\b\i\f1 \'d1GWAL}{\i\f1 
. In Tengwar spelling, the letter }{\b\i\f1 nwalm\'eb }{\i\f1 (< older }{\b\i\f1 ngwalm\'eb}{\i\f1 ) should be used to transcribe the initial }{\b\i\f1 nw }{\i\f1 of }{\b\i\f1 nwalya}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 )}{\f1  PAIN }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 naicel\'eb}{\f1 , }{
\b\f1 naic\'eb }{\i\f1 (= sharp pain)}{\f1 ; PAINFUL }{\b\f1 naicel\'eba }{\i\f1 -\'d1GWAL, N\'c1YAK
\par   }{\f1 PALATAL SERIES }{\b\f1 tyelpet\'e9ma }{\f1 -}{\i\f1 LotR:1154}{\f1 
\par   PALE }{\b\f1 marya }{\f1 (fallow, fawn), }{\b\f1 malwa }{\f1 (fallow), }{\b\f1 isca}{\f1 . PALE BLUE }{\b\f1 helwa}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -MAD, SMAL, LT1:256, 3EL
\par   }{\f1 PALLID }{\b\f1 ninqu\'eb }{\f1 (chill, white) }{\i\f1 -WJ:417 cf. NIK-W-
\par   }{\f1 PANSY }{\b\f1 helin}{\f1 ,}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 Helinyetill\'eb }{\i\f1 ("Eyes of heartsease") }{\f1 (violet) -}{\i\f1 LT1:262}{\f1 
\par   PARCHED }{\b\f1 fauca }{\f1 (openmouthed, thirsty) }{\i\f1 -PHAU
\par   }{\f1 PARCHMENT - }{\i\f1 in LT2:346, }{\b\i\f1 parma }{\i\f1 "book" is glossed "parchment", but see BARK.
\par   }{\f1 PARENT  }{\b\f1 #nostar }{\i\f1 (only pl }{\b\i\f1 nostari }{\i\f1 is attested); }{\b\f1 ontaro }{\i\f1 (m), }{\b\f1 ontar\'eb }{\i\f1 (f), pl }{\b\f1 ontani }{\f1 parents (begetter) }{\i\f1 -LotR:1017 cf. Letters:308, ONO
\par   }{\f1 PASS }{\b\f1 auta- }{\f1 (leave, go away); }{\i\f1 pa.t. }{\b\f1 oant\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 oanti\'eb }{\i\f1 (in the physical sense "went away [to another place]", }{\b\f1 v\'e1n\'eb }{\i\f1 ("the most
 frequently used past [tense]" - less "physical" than }{\b\i\f1 oant\'eb}{\i\f1 , meaning *"disappeared" rather than "passed away"), also }{\b\f1 anw\'eb }{\i\f1 (this pa.t. was "only found in archaic language"), perf. }{\b\f1 av\'e1ni\'eb }{\i\f1 (pl }{
\b\i\f1 av\'e1nier }{\i\f1 is attested); perf. }{\b\i\f1 v\'e1ni\'eb }{\i\f1 with no augment may occur in verse. -WJ:366; for the gloss "pass" see Silm:229
\par   }{\f1 PASS - }{\i\f1 mountain pass: }{\b\f1 falqua }{\f1 (cleft, ravine);}{\i\f1  pass between hills:}{\f1  }{\b\f1 cilya }{\f1 (cleft, gorge) }{\i\f1 (so in Etym, but }{\b\i\f1 #cirya }{\i\f1 in the name }{\b\i\f1 Calacirya }{\i\f1 
"Pass of Light" [gen. }{\b\i\f1 Calaciryo }{\i\f1 in Nam\'e1ri\'eb] - though this clashes with }{\b\i\f1 cirya }{\i\f1 "ship". An early version of Nam\'e1ri\'eb actually had }{\b\i\f1 Calacilyo }{\i\f1 not }{\b\i\f1 Calaciryo}{\i\f1 
; see An Introduction to Elvish p. 5) -LT2:341, KIL
\par   }{\f1 PASSAGE }{\b\f1 tarna }{\f1 (crossing, #ford) }{\i\f1 -LT2:347
\par   }{\f1 PAST, PAST AND OVER }{\i\f1 (adj) }{\b\f1 vanwa }{\f1 (departed, lost, vanished, dead, no longer to be had), PAST }{\i\f1 (noun = }{\f1 past time) }{\b\f1 vanwi\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -WAN, Nam
\par   }{\f1 PATH }{\b\f1 ti\'eb }{\f1 (course, line, direction, way, road); #}{\b\f1 vanda }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 Qualvanda}{\i\f1  "Road of Death" in LT1:264; cf. }{\b\i\f1 vand- }{\i\f1 "way, path" on the same page); }{\f1 NARROW PATH }{\b\f1 axa 
}{\f1 (ravine);
\par }{\i\f1 -TE3/RGEO:67/UT:22 cf. 51, LT1:264, AK    
\par   }{\f1 PAUSE }{\b\f1 l\'e1r }{\i\f1 (also a N\'famen\'f3rean linear measure, nearly one league - see LEAGUE.) -UT:285
\par }{\f1   PAVED FLOOR }{\b\f1 paca}{\f1  (court) }{\i\f1 -TAL, GL:63
\par   }{\f1 PEACE }{\b\f1 s\'e9r\'eb}{\f1  (repose, rest), AT PEACE }{\b\f1 senda }{\f1 (resting) }{\i\f1 -SED
\par   }{\f1 PEAK }{\b\f1 aical\'eb}{\f1 ; MOUNTAIN PEAK }{\b\f1 aicass\'eb}{\f1 , also #}{\b\f1 rass\'eb }{\f1 or }{\b\f1 #ras }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 Arfanyarass\'eb}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 Arfanyaras }{\i\f1 "high white-shining peak").}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 
-AYAK, WJ:416
\par   }{\f1 PEARL }{\b\f1 marilla }{\i\f1 -LT1:265
\par   }{\f1 PEBBLE-BANK }{\b\f1 sarni\'eb }{\f1 (shingle) }{\i\f1 -UT:463  
\par   }{\f1 PEER }{\b\f1 tihta- }{\f1 (blink) }{\i\f1 -MC:223
\par   }{\f1 PEN }{\b\f1 tecil }{\i\f1 -TEK
\par   }{\f1 PEOPLE }{\b\f1 li\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 noss\'eb }{\f1 (kin, house). }{\i\f1 Originally }{\b\i\f1 n\'f3r\'eb }{\i\f1 meant "people", but in later [MET] Quenya it means primarily "land".}{\f1  SOME PEOPLE }{\b\f1 queni }{\i\f1 
-LI, VT39:6, LT1:250/LT2:338, WJ:361 cf. 360}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
\par }{\f1   PERCEPTION, KEENNESS OF }{\b\f1 laic\'eb }{\f1 (acuteness) }{\i\f1 -LAIK
\par   }{\f1 PEREDHIL }{\b\f1 Pereldar }{\f1 (the Half-Elven) }{\i\f1 -Letters:386, cf. LotR:1071  
\par   }{\f1 PERFORMATION }{\b\f1 assa }{\f1 (hole, opening, mouth) }{\i\f1 -GAS
\par   }{\f1 PERIOD }{\i\f1 (endless) }{\b\f1 oio }{\i\f1 -UT:317
\par   }{\f1 PERPETUAL #}{\b\f1 oien }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 oiencarm\'eb }{\i\f1 "perpetual production" - but it has also been suggested that this is }{\b\i\f1 oi}{\i\f1 -}{\b\i\f1 en}{\i\f1 -}{\b\i\f1 carm\'eb}{\i\f1  *"ever-re-making", so the word 
}{\b\i\f1 oien}{\i\f1  is rather doubtful) -MR:329}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 
\par   }{\f1 PERSON }{\b\f1 qu\'e9n }{\f1 pl. }{\b\f1 queni }{\f1 (one, somebody); PERSON AS A WHOLE (body + soul) }{\b\f1 ess\'eb }{\i\f1 (basically meaning "name")}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 erd\'eb }{\i\f1 
("singularity". Note: a homophone means "seed, germ".) -WJ:361 cf. 360, MR:216
\par   }{\f1 PETTY #}{\b\f1 pitya }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 Pitya-naucor }{\i\f1 "petty-dwarves", see below).
\par   }{\f1 PETTY-DWARVES }{\b\f1 Attalyar }{\i\f1 (lit. "Bipeds"), }{\b\f1 Picinaucor}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Pitya-naucor }{\i\f1 (lit. *"small dwarves") -WJ:388, 389
\par }{\b\i\f1   }{\f1 PHANTOM }{\b\f1 fair\'eb }{\f1 ("phantom, disembodied spirit, when seen as a pale shape" - }{\i\f1 pl. }{\b\i\f1 fairi }{\i\f1 is attested. Note: }{\b\i\f1 fair\'eb }{\i\f1 has other shades of meaning as well as wholly
 different meanings - see SPIRIT, DEATH, RADIANCE, FREEDOM}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 -MC:223, 221
\par }{\f1   PHARAZ\'d4N }{\b\f1 Calion }{\f1 -}{\i\f1 UT:224, Silm:324}{\b\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1   }{\f1 PHONETIC #}{\b\f1 hlon\'edt\'eb }{\i\f1 (only attested in the pl. in }{\b\i\f1 hlon\'edti tengwi }{\i\f1 "phonetic signs", changed by Tolkien from }{\b\i\f1 hlonaiti tengwi}{\i\f1 ) -WJ:395, VT39:4}{\f1 
\par   PHONOLOGY - }{\b\f1 lambel\'eb}{\f1  is said to mean "Language (especially with reference to phonology)" }{\i\f1 (VT39:15)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1   }{\f1 PHYSICAL MATTER }{\b\f1 orma}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 hroa }{\i\f1 (also used = "body")}{\f1 ; PHYSICAL STRENGTH }{\b\f1 tuo }{\i\f1 -MR:218, 216, TUG
\par   }{\f1 PIERCING }{\b\f1 maica }{\f1 (sharp), }{\b\f1 terev\'eb }{\f1 (fine, acute), }{\b\f1 laic\'eb }{\i\f1 (glossed "keen, sharp, acute", never "piercing" - but the earlier [TLT] form was }{\b\i\f1 laica}{\i\f1 , glossed "keen, piercing". Note: }{
\b\i\f1 laic\'eb }{\i\f1 is also a noun meaning "acuteness, keenness". It may indeed be that this word is only a noun, for }{\b\i\f1 laic\'eb}{\i\f1  as an adjective may be a misreading for }{\b\i\f1 laica}{\i\f1 .) -Silm:434, LT1:255, LT2:337
\par   }{\f1 PILE }{\b\f1 hahta }{\f1 (mound) }{\i\f1 -KHAG
\par   }{\f1 PILLAR }{\b\f1 tarma}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tulw\'eb }{\f1 (standard, pole)}{\b\f1  }{\f1 -}{\i\f1 Silm:438, LT1:270
\par   }{\f1 PILLOW }{\b\f1 quesset }{\i\f1 -KWES
\par   }{\f1 PIN }{\b\f1 tancil }{\f1 (brooch) }{\i\f1 -TAK
\par   }{\f1 PINETREE - }{\i\f1 GL:17 has }{\b\i\f1 aicass\'eb}{\i\f1 , but in Etym this word is said to mean "mountain-peak".
\par   }{\f1 PINNACLE }{\i\f1 (topmost) see FINISH.
\par   }{\f1 PIPE }{\b\f1 simpa}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 simpina }{\f1 (flute), }{\b\f1 rots\'eb}{\f1 . PIPER }{\b\f1 simpetar}{\f1 , PIPING }{\b\f1 simpis\'eb }{\i\f1 -LT1:266, LT2:347
\par   }{\f1 PIT }{\b\f1 latta }{\f1 (hole }{\i\f1 - Note: a homophone means "strap"}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 -DAT
\par   }{\f1 PIVOT }{\b\f1 peltas }{\f1 (pl }{\b\f1 peltaxi}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 -PEL
\par   }{\f1 PLACE }{\b\f1 men }{\i\f1 (so in Etym, though this word would clash with *}{\b\i\f1 men }{\i\f1 "to/for us". In LotR, }{\b\i\f1 sinom\'eb }{\i\f1 is translated "on this place", pointing to }{\b\i\f1 #nom\'eb }{\i\f1 
as the word for "place". Tolkien first wrote }{\b\i\f1 s\'edman\'eb}{\i\f1 , then changed it to }{\b\i\f1 sinom\'eb}{\i\f1 . If #}{\b\i\f1 man }{\i\f1 in the first word is a variant form of }{\b\i\f1 men}{\i\f1 , Tolkien evidently rejected #}{\b\i\f1 man}
{\i\f1 /}{\b\i\f1 men }{\i\f1 in favour of #}{\b\i\f1 nom\'eb}{\i\f1 . On the other hand, }{\b\i\f1 men}{\i\f1  is also mentioned in the language notes in RGEO, a late source that is not easily dismissed.) }{\f1 STRONG PLACE }{\b\f1 sarn\'eb}{\f1 
. WISH TO GO TO A PLACE }{\b\f1 m\'edna}{\f1 - (desire to go in some direction, make for it, have some end in view)}{\i\f1  -MEN, LotR:1003, SD:56, SAR, VT39:11
\par  *}{\f1 PLANT #}{\b\f1 olva }{\i\f1 (only pl }{\b\i\f1 olvar }{\i\f1 is attested, never actually translated "plants" but defined as "growing things with roots in the earth"); }{\f1 LONG TRAILING PLANT}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 uil\'eb }{\i\f1 
("especially sea-weed", which is explicitly }{\b\i\f1 \'ebaruil\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -Silm:415, UY
\par   }{\f1 PLAY}{\i\f1  (vb) }{\b\f1 tyalin}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 ("I play", 1st pers. aorist)}{\f1 , PLAY }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 tyali\'eb }{\f1 (game, sport) }{\i\f1 -TYAL/LT1:260
\par   }{\f1 PLEDGE }{\b\f1 vanda }{\f1 (oath, solemn promise) }{\i\f1 -UT:317
\par   }{\f1 PLENITUDE }{\b\f1 f\'e1r\'eb }{\f1 (all that is wanted, sufficiency) }{\i\f1 -PHAR
\par   }{\f1 PLIANT }{\b\f1 maxa }{\f1 (soft) }{\i\f1 -MASAG
\par   }{\f1 PLOUGH }{\b\f1 hyar}{\f1 ; THE PLOUGH }{\i\f1 (constellation) see SICKLE OF THE VALAR.}{\b\f1  }{\f1 -}{\i\f1 LT2:342
\par   }{\f1 PLUM }{\b\f1 pio }{\i\f1 (also used for "cherry") -LT2:347
\par   }{\f1 POEM }{\b\f1 lair\'eb }{\i\f1 (Note: a homophone means "summer")}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 lirit}{\i\f1  -GLIR, LT1:258
\par   }{\f1 POINT }{\b\f1 ment\'eb }{\f1 (end), }{\b\f1 nasta }{\f1 (spearhead, gore, triangle), }{\b\f1 tix\'eb }{\f1 (dot, tiny mark), }{\b\f1 tild\'eb }{\f1 (horn), }{\b\f1 amatix\'eb}{\f1  (point/dot over the line of writing), }{\b\f1 nuntix\'eb }{\f1 
(point/dot under the line of writing) }{\i\f1 -MET, SNAS, TIK, TIL}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 
\par   }{\f1 POISON }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 sangwa }{\i\f1 -SAG}{\f1 
\par   POLISHED COPPER }{\b\f1 calarus}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 calarust}{\f1 -) -}{\i\f1 VT41:10
\par   }{\f1 POLLEN }{\b\f1 malo }{\f1 (yellow powder) }{\i\f1 -SMAL}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 POOL }{\b\f1 nend\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 linya}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ailin }{\f1 (lake), }{\b\f1 ring\'eb }{\f1 (cold lake); POOL OF LILIES }{\b\f1 n\'e9nuvar }{\i\f1 -NEN, LIN, AY, RINGI, LT1:248
\par   }{\f1 POPLAR-TREE }{\b\f1 tyuluss\'eb}{\f1 ; HAVING MANY POPLARS }{\b\f1 lintyuluss\'eba }{\i\f1 -TYUL, LIN
\par   }{\f1 POPPY }{\b\f1 f\'famella}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 fumellar}{\i\f1  [read *}{\b\i\f1 f\'famellar}{\i\f1 ?] is attested)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 f\'famellot }{\i\f1 (prob. }{\b\i\f1 f\'famell\'f3t}{\i\f1 -; cf. }{\b\i\f1 l\'f3t\'eb }{\i\f1 "fl
ower") -LT1:252}{\f1 
\par   POSSESS }{\b\f1 harya-}{\f1 ; POSSESSING }{\b\f1 arwa }{\i\f1 (+ genitive)}{\f1  (in control of) }{\i\f1 (Note: }{\b\i\f1 harya- }{\i\f1 
is not used of one's offspring. In MR:228, Tolkien notes that "no Elf would speak of possessing children; he would say: 'three children have been added unto me', or 'are with me', or 'are in my house'.") -3AR}{\f1 
\par   POST }{\i\f1 (wooden) }{\b\f1 samna }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (Distinct from #}{\b\i\f1 samna}{\i\f1  "diphthong" in Tengwar spelling, as the latter is spelt with initial }{\b\i\f1 silm\'eb}{\i\f1 , not }{\b\i\f1 s\'fal\'eb}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1  }{
\i\f1 -STAB
\par   }{\f1 POTTER }{\b\f1 cemnaro}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 centano }{\i\f1 -KEM, TAN}{\f1 
\par   POUR }{\b\f1 ulya- }{\i\f1 (intransitive pa. t. }{\b\i\f1 ull\'eb}{\i\f1 , transitive }{\b\i\f1 ulyan\'eb}{\i\f1 ; plural subjunctive }{\b\i\f1 ullier }{\i\f1 "should pour" is attested. These forms may obsolete }{\b\i\f1 ulu-}{\i\f1  and }{\b\i\f1 
ulto- }{\i\f1 "pour" [transitive and intransitive] in LT1:270)}{\f1 ; POURING }{\b\f1 \'fal\'eba }{\f1 (flooding, flowing) }{\i\f1 -ULU, SD:310}{\f1 
\par   POUT }{\b\f1 penga}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (VT39:11)}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 POWDER }{\i\f1 (yellow) }{\b\f1 malo }{\f1 (pollen) }{\i\f1 -SMAL
\par   }{\f1 PRAISE }{\i\f1 (vb)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 laita- }{\f1 (bless) }{\i\f1 (Imperative }{\b\i\f1 a laita }{\i\f1 and fut #}{\b\i\f1 laituva }{\i\f1 are attested, the latter with pronominal endings: }{\b\i\f1 laituvalmet}{\i\f1 , "we shall praise them") }{\f1 
PRAISE }{\i\f1 (noun) #}{\b\f1 laital\'eb }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 Erulaital\'eb }{\i\f1 "Praise of Eru")}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -LotR:989 cf Letters:308, UT:436
\par   }{\f1 PRAYER }{\b\f1 #kyerm\'eb }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 Erukyerm\'eb}{\i\f1 , "prayer to Eru". A verbal stem }{\b\i\f1 #kyer}{\i\f1 - "pray" can also be isolated. However, the group }{\b\i\f1 ky}{\i\f1  is anomalous for Quenya; it may be that }
{\b\i\f1 kyerm\'eb}{\i\f1  is a misreading for *}{\b\i\f1 hyerm\'eb}{\i\f1  in Tolkien's manuscript, pointing to *}{\b\i\f1 hyer}{\i\f1 - as the verb "pray".) -UT:436
\par   }{\f1 PRECIOUS THING }{\b\f1 m\'edr\'eb }{\f1 (jewel, treasure, shining jewel) }{\i\f1 -MIR
\par   }{\f1 PRECIPICE }{\i\f1 (seaward)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 ollo }{\f1 (cliff) }{\i\f1 (The alternative form }{\b\i\f1 old\'f3}{\i\f1  may be archaic Quenya.) -LT1:252
\par   }{\f1 PRESS }{\b\f1 sanga }{\f1 (crowd, throng) }{\i\f1 -STAG/Silm:438
\par   }{\f1 PREVENT FROM COMING TO COMPLETION }{\b\f1 nuhta- }{\f1 (stunt, stop short, not allow to continue) }{\i\f1 -WJ:413
\par   }{\f1 PRICK }{\b\f1 erca-}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 nasta- }{\f1 (sting); PRICKLE, SPINE }{\b\f1 erca }{\i\f1 -ER\'c9K, NAS
\par  ?}{\f1 PRIMARY }{\i\f1 (Tolkien's handwriting was illegible) }{\b\f1 *yess\'eba }{\i\f1 (corrected from the actual reading }{\b\i\f1 essea }{\i\f1 - see BEGINNING) -ESE
\par   }{\f1 PRINCE }{\b\f1 cundu}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 haryon }{\f1 (heir); PRINCESS }{\b\f1 aranel }{\i\f1 -KUNDU, 3AR, UT:434}{\f1 
\par   PRINCIPAL }{\i\f1 (prob. adj not noun)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 h\'e9ra }{\f1 (chief) }{\i\f1 -KHER 
\par }{\f1   PRIVACY }{\b\f1 aquapahti\'eb}{\f1  (literally *"fully-closedness", used of a mind that closes itself against telepathic communication) -}{\i\f1 VT39:23}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 PROCEED }{\i\f1 (in any direction) }{\b\f1 lelya}{\f1 - (pa.t. }{\b\f1 lend\'eb}{\f1 ) (go, travel) }{\i\f1 -WJ:363
\par   }{\f1 PRODUCTION }{\b\f1 carm\'eb }{\i\f1 (glossed "art" in UT:396, but cf. }{\b\i\f1 Oiencarm\'eb Eruo }{\i\f1 "the One's perpetual production". }{\b\i\f1 Carm\'eb }{\i\f1 is also translated "making".) -MR:329
\par }{\f1   PROFOUND }{\b\f1 tumna}{\f1  (low-lying, low, deep, dark or hidden) }{\i\f1 -LT1:271 cf. TUB
\par   }{\f1 PROLONG }{\b\f1 taita- }{\i\f1 -TAY
\par   }{\f1 PROMINENT }{\b\f1 minda }{\f1 (conspicuous)}{\i\f1  -MINI
\par   }{\f1 PROMISE }{\i\f1 (solemn) }{\b\f1 vanda }{\f1 (oath, pledge) }{\i\f1 -UT:317
\par   }{\f1 PROMONTORY }{\i\f1 (narrow) }{\b\f1 neht\'eb }{\i\f1 -UT:282
\par   }{\f1 PROP }{\b\f1 tulco }{\f1 (support) }{\i\f1 -TULUK}{\b\f1  
\par   }{\f1 PROPER }{\b\f1 vanima }{\f1 (fair, beautiful, right) }{\i\f1 -LT1:272
\par   }{\f1 PROSPEROUS }{\b\f1 alya }{\f1 (rich, abundant, blessed); PROSPERITY }{\b\f1 aut\'eb }{\f1 (wealth, }{\i\f1 also adj: }{\f1 rich) }{\i\f1 -GALA, LT2:336
\par   }{\f1 PROTECT }{\b\f1 varya-}{\f1 ;}{\b\f1  }{\f1 PROTECTED }{\b\f1 varna }{\f1 (safe, secure) }{\i\f1 -BAR
\par   }{\f1 PROVERBIAL DICTUM }{\i\f1 ("a saying, a current or proverbial dictum")}{\f1  }{\b\f1 eques }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 equessi}{\i\f1 ) }{\f1 (dictum, quotation, saying) }{\i\f1 -WJ:392
\par   }{\f1 PROW OF A SHIP }{\b\f1 lango }{\f1 (broad sword) }{\i\f1 -LAG
\par   P}{\f1 -SERIES }{\b\f1 parmat\'e9ma }{\f1 (labials) -}{\i\f1 LotR:1154}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 PUFF }{\b\f1 hwesta-}{\f1 ;}{\b\f1  }{\f1 PUFF}{\i\f1  }{\f1 OF AIR }{\b\f1 hwesta }{\f1 (breath, breeze) }{\i\f1 -SWES
\par }{\f1   PURE }{\b\f1 poica }{\i\f1 -POY
\par   }{\f1 PURSUE }{\b\f1 roita- }{\i\f1 -ROY}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1\fs12 
\par     }{\f1 PUT ASIDE }{\b\f1 hehta- }{\i\f1 (pa.t. }{\b\i\f1 hehtan\'eb }{\i\f1 is given but seems perfectly regular) }{\f1 (leave out, exclude, abandon, forsake); PUT A STOP TO }{\b\f1 pusta- }{\f1 (stop, cease) }{\i\f1 -WJ:365, PUS
\par }{\f1   PUT FORTH LEAVES OR FLOWERS *}{\b\f1 lohta- }{\i\f1 (corrected from the actual reading }{\b\i\f1 lokta }{\i\f1 because Tolkien later decided that }{\b\i\f1 kt }{\i\f1 became }{\b\i\f1 ht }{\i\f1 in Quenya)}{\f1  (sprout) -}{\i\f1 LT:258
\par   }{\f1 PUTRID }{\b\f1 saura }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (foul, evil-smelling)  - }{\i\f1 in compounds #}{\b\i\f1 sauri-}{\i\f1 , see FOUL}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 -THUS
\par 
\par }{\b\i\f1\fs24  }{\b\f1\fs24  <Q>}{\f1 
\par   QUANTITY }{\i\f1 (great) }{\b\f1 \'fav\'eb }{\f1 (abundance) }{\i\f1 -UB
\par   }{\f1 QUARREL }{\b\f1 costa- }{\i\f1 -KOT
\par   }{\f1 QUEEN }{\b\f1 t\'e1ri}{\f1  (}{\i\f1 gen }{\b\i\f1 t\'e1rio }{\i\f1 is attested)}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 LT1:260 gives }{\b\i\f1 turinqui }{\i\f1 "queen", while LT1:273 gives }{\b\i\f1 vardi, }{\i\f1 but these are hardly valid words in LotR-style Quenya.}{
\f1  QUEEN OF STARS }{\i\f1 (Varda's title) }{\b\f1 Elent\'e1ri }{\i\f1 (so in LotR and Silm; Etym has also }{\b\i\f1 Tinwet\'e1ri}{\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 Tinwetar}{\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 Tinwerontar}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 ; QUEEN OF THE EARTH }{\b\f1 Kement\'e1ri }{\i\f1 
(a title of Yavanna) -T\'c2/LT1:264/Nam/RGEO:67, Silm:55/437/30
\par   }{\f1 QUICK SHAKE }{\b\f1 rinc\'eb }{\f1 (flourish) }{\i\f1 -RIK
\par   }{\f1 QUIET }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 quild\'eb }{\f1 (rest, hush) }{\i\f1 -GL:23
\par   }{\f1 QUIVER }{\b\f1 vainol\'eb }{\i\f1 -LT1:271
\par   }{\f1 QUOTATION }{\b\f1 eques }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 equessi}{\i\f1 ) }{\f1 (dictum, proverbial dictum, saying)}{\i\f1  -WJ:392
\par 
\par }{\b\f1\fs24   <R>}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 RACE }{\b\f1 n\'f3r\'eb }{\f1 (land, country, dwelling-place, nation, native land, family) }{\i\f1 -N\'d4
\par   }{\f1 RADAGAST }{\b\f1 Aiwendil }{\i\f1 ("Lover of Birds", his original Valinorean name, not an actual translation of "Radagast", which is either Ad\'fbnaic for "Tender of Beasts" or a Mannish name of uncertain meaning) -UT:393/417, cf. 390, 401
\par   }{\f1 RADIANCE }{\b\f1 alcar}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 alcar\'eb}{\f1  (brilliance, splendour), }{\b\f1 fair\'eb }{\i\f1 (Note: this word has several other meanings - see DEATH, FREEDOM, PHANTOM)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 nalta}{\f1  (glittering reflection - }{\b\i\f1 alata}
{\i\f1  in Silm:433 is the Telerin form. In PM:347, }{\b\i\f1 nalta}{\i\f1  is spelt with initial }{\b\i\f1 \'f1}{\i\f1 , that is, }{\b\i\f1 ng}{\i\f1 . Initial }{\b\i\f1 ng }{\i\f1 had become }{\b\i\f1 n }{\i\f1 i
n Third Age Quenya, and I follow the system of LotR and transcribe it accordingly. But if this word is written in Tengwar, the initial }{\b\i\f1 n }{\i\f1 should be transcribed with the letter }{\b\i\f1 noldo}{\i\f1 , not }{\b\i\f1 n\'famen}{\i\f1 .)}{
\f1  RADIANT }{\b\f1 alcarinqua}{\i\f1  }{\f1 (glorious) }{\i\f1 -AKLA-R, PHAY, PM:347, WJ:369 (where }{\b\i\f1 alkar }{\i\f1 is translated "splendour")
\par   }{\f1 RAGE }{\b\f1 aha }{\i\f1 -LotR:1157
\par   }{\f1 RAIN }{\b\f1 mist\'eb }{\f1 (fine rain), }{\b\f1 ross\'eb }{\f1 (fine rain, dew, spray), }{\b\f1 ucco}{\f1 ; RAINBOW }{\b\f1 helyanw\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (lit. "sky-bridge"),}{\f1  }{\b\f1 Ilweran}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Ilweranta}{\i\f1 . (LT2 has }{\b\i\f1 
iluquinga }{\i\f1 "sky-bow", but this was obsoleted together with }{\b\i\f1 ilu }{\i\f1 "sky"; see SKY.)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -MIZD, ROS cf. Letters:282, GL:74, 3EL, LT1:256, LT2:348
\par   }{\f1 RAISE }{\b\f1 orta}{\b\i\f1 - }{\f1 (lift up, rise) }{\i\f1 (pa.t. }{\b\i\f1 ortan\'eb }{\i\f1 is attested; }{\b\i\f1 orta- }{\i\f1 probably obsoletes }{\b\i\f1 orto- }{\i\f1 in LT1:256)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 amu-}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
-ORO, Nam, RGEO:67, LT2:335
\par }{\b\f1   }{\f1 RAPID }{\b\f1 larca}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 alarca }{\i\f1 -LAK
\par   }{\f1 RAT *}{\b\f1 nyarro }{\f1 ("nyano" in LR:379 must be a misreading; primitive *}{\i\f1 nyadr\'f4}{\f1  could impossibly become }{\b\f1 nyano}{\f1  in Quenya). }{\i\f1 -NYAD
\par   }{\f1 RAVINE }{\b\f1 axa }{\f1 (narrow path), }{\b\f1 y\'e1w\'eb }{\f1 (cleft, gulf), }{\b\f1 falqua}{\f1  (cleft, mountain pass) }{\i\f1 -AK, LT2:341
\par   }{\f1 RAY OF LIGHT }{\b\f1 alca}{\f1 ; RAY OF THE SUN }{\b\f1 firin }{\i\f1 (the latter may not be a valid word in LotR-style Quenya; it would clash with the verb "I fade" or "I die").}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -AKLA-R, LT2:341
\par  }{\f1 "RAYMENT, VEILS" }{\b\f1 fana }{\i\f1 (pl }{\b\i\f1 fanar}{\i\f1  is attested. This word was used of the visible bodies in which the Valar presented themselves to incarnates.) -RGEO:74 
\par   }{\f1 RE- }{\i\f1 (prefix) }{\b\f1 en- }{\i\f1 (as in }{\b\i\f1 entuless\'eb }{\i\f1 "return" and }{\b\i\f1 envinyatar }{\i\f1 "renewer", q.v. Also used on verbs: }{\b\i\f1 #enquat- }{\i\f1 "refill" [only fut. }{\b\i\f1 enquantuva }{\i\f1 
is attested, see REFILL]. Before the consonants }{\b\i\f1 l}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 m}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 r}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 s}{\i\f1 , the prefix }{\b\i\f1 en- }{\i\f1 would be assimilated to *}{\b\i\f1 el-}{\i\f1 , *}{\b\i\f1 em}{\i\f1 -, *}{\b\i\f1 er}{
\i\f1 -, and *}{\b\i\f1 es}{\i\f1 -, respectively. Very early [The Lost Tales] "Qenya" has }{\b\i\f1 an- }{\i\f1 instead of }{\b\i\f1 en- }{\i\f1 [see LT1:184].)
\par   }{\f1 REACH *}{\b\f1 rahta- }{\f1 (strech out)}{\i\f1  (Corrected from the actual reading }{\b\i\f1 rakta}{\i\f1 ; Tolkien later decided that }{\b\i\f1 kt }{\i\f1 became }{\b\i\f1 ht }{\i\f1 in Quenya) -LT1:335
\par   }{\f1 REAL }{\b\f1 anwa }{\f1 (actual, true) }{\i\f1 -ANA}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1\fs12 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 REALM }{\b\f1 arda }{\f1 (region)}{\i\f1 . This word means "any more or less bounded or defined place, a region" (WJ:402) or "a particular land or region" (WJ:413). }{\b\i\f1 Arda }{\i\f1 (with a capital }{\b\i\f1 A}{\i\f1 
) was "the name given to our world or earth...within the immensity of E\'e4".}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -3AR, Letters:283
\par   }{\f1 REAR }{\b\f1 tell\'eb }{\i\f1 -TELES
\par   }{\f1 RECALL #}{\b\f1 enyal}{\f1 - (inf. }{\b\f1 enyali\'eb}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 -UT:302, 317
\par   }{\f1 RECKON }{\b\f1 not-}{\f1 ; *RECKONING }{\b\f1 #on\'f3tim\'eb }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 Y\'e9non\'f3ti\'eb }{\i\f1 *"reckoning of years")}{\f1 , *RECKONER }{\b\f1 On\'f3timo }{\i\f1 
(the untranslated title of one Quennar, an expert of chronology) -NOT, MR:48-51
\par }{\f1   RECEIVE }{\b\f1 tuvu}{\f1 - (same as in }{\b\f1 ut\'favienyes}{\f1  "I have found it"? See FIND) }{\i\f1 -GL:71
\par   }{\f1 RED }{\b\f1 carn\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 aira }{\f1 ("ruddy, copper-coloured"), }{\b\f1 narwa }{\f1 ("fiery red",}{\i\f1  cf. }{\b\i\f1 n\'e1r\'eb}{\i\f1  "flame"}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 nasar }{\i\f1 (adopted from Valarin; used in Vanyarin Quenya only)}{\f1 
; RED [HEAT?] }{\i\f1 (Tolkien's handwriting was illegible)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 yulm\'eb }{\i\f1 (Note: a homophone means "drinking, carousal".) }{\f1 RED FLAME }{\b\f1 r\'fanya}{\f1 , WITH ADORNMENT OF RED JEWELS }{\b\f1 carnim\'edri\'eb }{\i\f1 
(a pl form? Sg *}{\b\i\f1 carnim\'edr\'eba}{\i\f1 ? Letters:224 has }{\b\i\f1 carne- }{\i\f1 instead of }{\b\i\f1 carni-}{\i\f1 .) -KAR\'c1N/Silm:429, GAY, NAR, WJ:399, YUL, Silm:437, LotR:505 cf. Letters:224
\par   }{\f1 REED }{\b\f1 lisc\'eb }{\f1 (sedge) }{\i\f1 -LT2:335 (GL:34 also gives }{\b\i\f1 feng}{\i\f1 -, but some ending would be required)
\par   }{\f1 REEK }{\b\f1 usqu\'eb }{\i\f1 -USUK
\par   }{\f1 REFILL #}{\b\f1 enquat- }{\i\f1 (only fut. }{\b\i\f1 enquantuva }{\i\f1 is attested, but cf. }{\b\i\f1 quat- }{\i\f1 "fill" in WJ:392) -Nam
\par }{\f1   REFLECTION }{\i\f1 (glittering)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 nalta}{\f1  (radiance - }{\b\i\f1 alata}{\i\f1  in Silm:433 is the Telerin form. In PM:347, }{\b\i\f1 nalta}{\i\f1  is spelt with initial }{\b\i\f1 \'f1}{\i\f1 , that is, }{\b\i\f1 ng}{\i\f1 . Initial 
}{\b\i\f1 ng }{\i\f1 had become }{\b\i\f1 n }{\i\f1 in Third Age Quenya, and I follow the system of LotR and transcribe it accordingly. But if this word is written in Tengwar, the initial }{\b\i\f1 n }{\i\f1 should be transcribed with the letter }{
\b\i\f1 noldo}{\i\f1 , not }{\b\i\f1 n\'famen}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -PM:347}{\b\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 REFUSE }{\b\f1 v\'e1quet- }{\f1 (forbid, say no) }{\i\f1 (1st pers. sg aorist and past }{\b\i\f1 v\'e1quetin}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 v\'e1quenten }{\i\f1 are given)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 avaquet}{\f1 - (forbid) }{\i\f1 (pa.t. is no doubt *}{\b\i\f1 
avaquent\'eb}{\i\f1 ; cf. }{\b\i\f1 quet- }{\i\f1 under SAY)}{\f1 ,}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 ava- }{\f1 (say no)}{\i\f1 . (Pa.t. }{\b\i\f1 avan\'eb }{\i\f1 is given; this verb was "little used in ordinary language".)}{\f1  }{\i\f1  -WJ:370, KWET
\par   }{\f1 REGION }{\b\f1 m\'e9na}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 arda }{\f1 (realm)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -MEN, LotR:1157
\par   }{\f1 REGULAR }{\b\f1 sanya }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (law-abiding, normal) }{\i\f1 -STAN
\par   }{\f1 RELATE }{\b\f1 nyar- }{\f1 (tell); NOT TO BE TOLD OR RELATED }{\b\f1 avany\'e1rima}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -NAR}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 , WJ:370}{\i\f1\fs12 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 RELEASE }{\b\f1 lerya}{\f1 - (set free, let go), }{\b\f1 fainu-}{\f1 ; RELEASED }{\b\f1 lehta}{\f1  (free); RELEASED ELEMENT (a term for "vowel") #}{\b\f1 lehta tengw\'eb}{\f1  (only pl. }{\b\f1 lehta tengwi}{\f1 
 is attested; we would rather expect *}{\b\f1 leht\'eb tengwi}{\f1 ). }{\i\f1 -VT41:5, 6, LT2:250, VT39:17}{\f1   }{\i\f1 
\par   }{\f1 REMAINS }{\b\f1 erin }{\f1 (evidently a verb; the ending -}{\b\f1 n}{\f1  for 3rd person rather than 1st person would not be valid in later Quenya, but a verbal stem }{\b\f1 er}{\f1 - "remain" may perhaps be extracted). }{\i\f1 -LT1:269
\par   }{\f1 REMOTE }{\b\f1 haira }{\f1 (far), }{\b\f1 eccaira}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 avahaira }{\i\f1 -KHAYA
\par   }{\f1 REND }{\b\f1 narci-}{\f1 ; RENDING }{\b\f1 naraca }{\f1 (harsh, violent)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -N\'c1RAK
\par   }{\f1 RENEW }{\b\f1 #envinyata- }{\f1 (heal) }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 Envinyatar}{\i\f1 , see below. Past participle }{\b\i\f1 Envinyanta }{\i\f1 is attested, though it is translated "healed" rather than *"renewed".)  }{\f1 RENEWER }{\b\f1 
Envinyatar }{\i\f1 -MR:405, LotR:897
\par   }{\f1 REPEAT }{\b\f1 tatya- }{\f1 (double); REPEATED }{\b\f1 vorima}{\f1  (continual) }{\i\f1 -TATA, BOR
\par  }{\f1  REPOSE }{\b\f1 Est\'eb }{\i\f1 (the name of a Vali\'eb; because of this name, }{\b\i\f1 est\'eb }{\i\f1 fell out of use as a general word for "repose"). -WJ:403, 404}{\f1 
\par   RESONANCE OF THE VOCAL CHORDS }{\b\f1 \'f3ma}{\f1  (voice) }{\i\f1 -VT39:16}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 RESONANT }{\i\f1 (of strings) }{\b\f1 tunga }{\f1 (taut, tight) }{\i\f1 -TUG
\par   }{\f1 REST }{\b\f1 serin }{\i\f1 ("I rest", 1st pers. aorist)}{\f1 ; REST }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 s\'e9r\'eb }{\f1 (repose, peace), }{\b\f1 quild\'eb }{\f1 (quiet, hush); }{\b\f1 Est\'eb }{\i\f1 (the name of a Vali\'eb; because of this name, }{\b\i\f1 
est\'eb }{\i\f1 fell out of use as a general word for "rest") }{\f1 (repose)}{\i\f1 ; }{\f1 TAKE A REST }{\b\f1 hauta-}{\f1 ; RESTING }{\b\f1 senda }{\f1 (at peace) }{\i\f1 -SED, EZD\'ca/WJ:404, GL:23, KHAW}{\f1 
\par   RESTRAIN }{\b\f1 avalerya}{\f1 - (bind, make fast, deprive of liberty) }{\i\f1 -VT41:5, 6}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 RETURN }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 pel-}{\f1  (revolve, go round), RETURN }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 entuless\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -PEL, UT:171, 434
\par   }{\f1 REVERED }{\i\f1 The element #}{\b\i\f1 ar- }{\i\f1 in }{\b\i\f1 Arfanyarass\'eb }{\i\f1 (a name of Taniquetil) is said to mean "high (i.e., noble, revered)"}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -WJ:416
\par   }{\f1 REVERSED }{\b\f1 nuquerna }{\i\f1 -LotR:1157
\par   }{\f1 REVOLVE }{\b\f1 pel- }{\f1 (return, go round) }{\i\f1 -PEL
\par   }{\f1 RICH }{\b\f1 alya }{\f1 (prosperous, abundant, blessed), }{\b\f1 aut\'eb }{\f1 (}{\i\f1 also as noun: }{\f1 prosperity, wealth) }{\b\f1 herenya }{\f1 (wealthy, fortunate, blessed) }{\i\f1 -GALA, LT2:335, KHER
\par   }{\f1 RIDER }{\b\f1 roquen }{\f1 (horseman, knight) }{\i\f1 -WJ:372, UT:282
\par   }{\f1 RIGHT }{\b\f1 t\'e9ra}{\f1  (straight), }{\b\f1 vanima }{\f1 (fair, proper, beautiful). RIGHT }{\i\f1 (direction) }{\b\f1 forya}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 fort\'eb }{\i\f1 (Note: the latter word also means "north")}{\f1 ; RIGHTHANDED }{\b\f1 formait\'eb }{
\f1 (dexterous) }{\i\f1 -TE3, LT1:272, PHOR
\par   }{\f1 RIME }{\b\f1 ringw\'eb }{\f1 (frost) }{\i\f1 -LT1:255
\par   }{\f1 RING #}{\b\f1 corma }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 cormacolindor}{\i\f1  "Ring-bearers")}{\f1 ; RING-DAY }{\b\f1 Cormar\'eb }{\f1 (}{\i\f1 Yavanni\'eb }{\f1 30th, a festival in honour of Frodo Baggins; this was his birthday); RING-WRAITHS }{
\b\f1 \'dalairi }{\f1 (Nazg\'fbl) }{\i\f1 (pl; sg }{\b\i\f1 #\'dalair\'eb}{\i\f1 ? Note that }{\b\i\f1 \'dalairi }{\i\f1 is not a literal translation of "ring-wraiths"; the prefix }{\b\i\f1 \'fa}{\i\f1 
- may mean "un-" with evil connotation; the rest of the word is obscure. }{\b\i\f1 Lair\'eb }{\i\f1 "summer" or "poem" can hardly have anything to do with }{\b\i\f1 #lairi}{\i\f1 . The syllable }{\b\i\f1 \'fal}{\i\f1 
- may also have something to do with the Black Speech word }{\f1 g\'fbl, }{\i\f1 wraith}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 ) -LotR:989 cf. Letters:308, LotR.1146, Silm:362, 417
\par   }{\f1 RINGING SOUND }{\b\f1 l\'e1ma }{\f1 (echo }{\i\f1 - so in Etym, but see SOUND}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 -LAM
\par   }{\f1 RISE }{\b\f1 orta- }{\i\f1 (pa.t. }{\b\i\f1 ortan\'eb }{\i\f1 is attested; }{\b\i\f1 orta- }{\i\f1 obsoletes }{\b\i\f1 oro- }{\i\f1 in LT1:256) }{\f1 (lift up, raise); RISING }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 \'f3r\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
(Note: a homophone means "heart, inner mind"; but cf. MIGHTY-RISING)}{\f1 ; SUNRISE }{\b\f1 anar\'f3r\'eb }{\i\f1 (LT1:264 has }{\b\i\f1 oront\'eb}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 oronto}{\i\f1 
, but these words may not be valid in LotR-style Quenya). -ORO, LT1:256, Nam/RGEO:67
\par   }{\f1 RIVER }{\b\f1 s\'edr\'eb}{\i\f1  }{\f1 (stream). }{\i\f1 (LT1:248/262 also gives }{\b\i\f1 nen}{\i\f1 , while LT1:260 gives }{\b\i\f1 celusindi}{\i\f1 ; LT1:265 gives }{\b\i\f1 sindi}{\i\f1 ; these may not be valid words in LotR-style Quenya)}{
\f1 . RIVULET }{\b\f1 siril}{\f1 ; MOUTH OF RIVER }{\b\f1 etsir }{\i\f1 -SIR, ET
\par }{\f1   ROAD }{\b\f1 t\'eba }{\f1 (straight line) }{\i\f1 (note: not to be confused with the verb }{\b\i\f1 t\'eba}{\i\f1 - "indicate")}{\f1 , ROAD IN SEA }{\b\f1 lond\'eb }{\f1 (entrance to harbour, translated "haven" in }{\b\f1 Alqualond\'eb }{\f1 
Haven of the Swans, UT:417), }{\b\f1 ti\'eb }{\f1 (path, course, direction, way), #}{\b\f1 vanda }{\i\f1 (isolated form }{\b\i\f1 Qualvanda}{\i\f1  "Road of Death" in LT1:264; cf. }{\b\i\f1 vand- }{\i\f1 "way, path" on the same page) -TE\'d1
, LOD, TE3/RGEO:67, LT1:264
\par   }{\f1 ROARING }{\b\f1 r\'e1v\'eba}{\f1 ; ROARING NOISE }{\b\f1 r\'e1v\'eb}{\i\f1  -MC:223 cf. 215
\par   }{\f1 ROBE }{\b\f1 vaima }{\i\f1 -LT1:271
\par }{\f1   ROCKHEWN HALL }{\b\f1 hr\'f3ta}{\f1  (dwelling underground, artificial cave) }{\i\f1 -PM:365
\par   }{\f1 ROOF}{\i\f1  (vb)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 t\'f3pa-}{\f1 ;}{\b\f1  }{\f1 ROOF }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 t\'f3pa}{\f1 ; HAVING A ROOF }{\b\f1 telda}{\f1 ; "DOWN-ROOF" (cover) }{\b\f1 unt\'fapa}{\f1 -}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -TOP, LT2:348, RGEO:67/Nam
\par   }{\f1 ROOM }{\b\f1 samb\'eb }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (chamber) }{\i\f1 -STAB
\par   }{\f1 ROOT, ROOTWORD }{\b\f1 sundo}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 (pl #}{\b\i\f1 sundar}{\i\f1  in }{\b\i\f1 Tarmasundar }{\i\f1 "Roots of the Pillar" in UT:166, but this may be a different word)}{\f1  (base), }{\b\f1 talma }{\f1 (foundation, base), }{\b\f1 sulca }{
\i\f1 (esp. edible root) -SUD, TAL, S\'daLUK
\par   }{\f1 ROUND }{\b\f1 corna }{\f1 (globed), }{\b\f1 corima}{\f1 ; ISOLATED ROUND HILL }{\b\f1 tolmen }{\f1 (boss of shield), GO ROUND }{\b\f1 pel- }{\f1 (return, revolve) }{\i\f1 -KOR, LT1:257, 269, PEL
\par   }{\f1 ROW }{\b\f1 t\'e9ma }{\f1 (series, line) }{\i\f1 (pl }{\b\i\f1 t\'e9mar}{\i\f1  is attested) -TE\'d1, LotR:1153
\par   }{\f1 ROYAL #}{\b\f1 arna }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 Arnanor}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 Arnan\'f3r\'eb}{\i\f1 , "royal land", Arnor)}{\f1 ; ROYALIST }{\b\f1 arandil }{\f1 (king's friend)}{\i\f1  -Letters:428, 386   
\par   }{\f1 RUDDY }{\b\f1 aira }{\f1 (red, copper-coloured), }{\b\f1 roina }{\i\f1 -GAY, ROY
\par   }{\f1 RUINOUS }{\b\f1 atalant\'eba }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 atalanti\'eb }{\i\f1 is attested) -MC:222, 223
\par   }{\f1 RULE }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 heru- }{\i\f1 (Note: }{\b\i\f1 heru }{\i\f1 is also the noun "lord"). LT1:273 has }{\b\i\f1 vard- }{\i\f1 "rule, govern", but this is hardly a valid word in LotR-style Quenya.}{\f1  RULE }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 sany\'eb }{
\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (law), }{\b\f1 axan }{\f1 (commandment, law, as proceeding primarily from Eru; pl. }{\b\f1 axani}{\f1  is attested.) }{\i\f1 -LT1:272, STAN, WJ:399/VT39:30
\par   }{\f1 RULER }{\b\f1 c\'e1no}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 c\'e1nu }{\i\f1 (see COMMANDER)}{\f1  (governor, chieftain, commander), }{\b\f1 #tur }{\i\f1 (as in }{\b\i\f1 Minyatur}{\i\f1 , "first Ruler") }{\f1 (lord) }{\i\f1 -UT:400, 466
\par   }{\f1 RUN ON, RUN SMOOTHLY }{\b\f1 nornoro- }{\i\f1 -LT1:263
\par   }{\f1 RUNE }{\b\f1 certa }{\i\f1 (pl }{\b\i\f1 certar }{\i\f1 is attested. This word only occurred in Exilic Quenya, adopted and adapted from Sindarin }{\f1 certh}{\i\f1 . Tolkien notes that if inherited, the form would have had the form }{\b\i\f1 *cirt
\'eb}{\i\f1 .) -WJ:396, LotR:1151
\par   }{\f1 RUSHING }{\i\f1 (adjectival) }{\b\f1 rimpa }{\f1 (flying), }{\b\f1 arauca }{\f1 (swift); RUSHING }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 orm\'eb }{\f1 (wrath, violence, haste) }{\i\f1 -KHOR, LT2:347, GOR     
\par   }{\f1 RUSTLE }{\b\f1 esc\'eb }{\f1 (noise of leaves) }{\i\f1 -EZGE
\par 
\par }{\b\f1\fs24   <S>}{\i\f1 
\par   }{\f1 SAFE }{\b\f1 varna }{\f1 (protected, secure). (GL:58 has }{\b\f1 moina }{\f1 "safe, secure", but in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\f1 moina }{\f1 means "dear, familiar", and the former }{\b\f1 moina }{\f1 now appears as }{\b\f1 muina }{\f1 
"hidden, secret".) SAFE KEEPING }{\b\f1 mando }{\f1 (custody) }{\i\f1 -BAR, MR:350
\par   }{\f1 SAGA }{\b\f1 ny\'e1r\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 nyarna }{\f1 (tale, history) }{\i\f1 -NAR}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1\fs12 
\par }{\f1   SAGACIOUS }{\b\f1 finwa }{\i\f1 -LT1:253}{\f1 
\par   SAIL #}{\b\f1 cir- }{\i\f1 (only attested as a continuative stem: }{\b\i\f1 c\'edra}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 LT1:273 has }{\b\i\f1 wili- }{\i\f1 "sail, float, fly", but see FLY.}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -MC:221}{\f1 
\par   SAILOR }{\b\f1 ciryaquen }{\f1 (shipman) }{\i\f1 -WJ:372}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1   }{\f1 SAKALTH\'d4R }{\b\f1 Falassion }{\f1 -}{\i\f1 UT:223}{\f1 
\par   SALVE }{\b\f1 lipsa }{\i\f1 -LIB}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 
\par   }{\f1 SANCTUARY }{\b\f1 y\'e1na }{\f1 (holy place) }{\i\f1 -YAN
\par   }{\f1 SAND }{\b\f1 lits\'eb }{\i\f1 -LIT
\par   }{\f1 SARUMAN }{\b\f1 Curumo }{\f1 (= }{\i\f1 Sindarin }{\f1 Curun\'edr) }{\i\f1 -UT:393, 401, 427
\par   }{\f1 SATURN }{\b\f1 Lumbar }{\i\f1 -WJ:xi/Basic Quenya:24, cf. Silm:55
\par }{\f1   SAURON (The Abhorred) }{\b\f1 Sauron }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ), other names }{\b\f1 S\'faro}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Sauro}{\f1  (all }{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\i\f1  -THUS
\par   }{\f1 SAY }{\b\f1 quet}{\f1 - (pa.t. }{\b\f1 quent\'eb}{\f1 ) (speak, talk), }{\b\f1 equ\'eb }{\i\f1 (the latter word "has no tense forms...being mostly used only before either a proper name...or a full independent pronoun, in the senses }{\f1 
say / says }{\i\f1 or }{\f1 said}{\i\f1 . A quotation then follows, either direct, or less usually indirect after a 'that'-construction (...) Affixes appear in }{\f1 equen '}{\i\f1 said I', }{\f1 eques }{\i\f1 'said he / she' ." }{\f1 (WJ:392, 415) }{
\i\f1 Cf. also }{\f1 SAY NO }{\b\f1 v\'e1quet- }{\f1 (forbid, refuse) }{\i\f1 (1st pers. sg aorist and past }{\b\i\f1 v\'e1quetin}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 v\'e1quenten }{\i\f1 are given)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ava- }{\f1 (refuse)}{\i\f1  (pa.t. }{\b\i\f1 avan\'eb }{
\i\f1 is given; this verb was "little used in ordinary language")}{\f1 . NOT TO BE SAID, THAT MUST NOT BE SAID }{\b\f1 avaqu\'e9tima}{\f1 . SAYING }{\b\f1 eques }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 equessi}{\i\f1 ) }{\f1 (dictum, proverbial dictum, quotation)}{\i\f1 
 -Silm:436, WJ:370, LT2:348, WJ:392
\par   }{\f1 SCHOLAR }{\b\f1 istyar }{\f1 (learned man) }{\i\f1 -IS
\par   }{\f1 SCOOP OUT }{\b\f1 calpa- }{\f1 (draw out, bale out) }{\i\f1 -KALPA}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 SCORN }{\b\f1 yaiw\'eb }{\f1 (mocking) }{\i\f1 -YAY
\par   }{\f1 SCREEN }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 telta- }{\f1 (canopy, overshadow), SCREEN FROM LIGHT }{\b\f1 halya- }{\i\f1 (veil, conceal)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -SKAL, TEL
\par   }{\f1 SEA }{\b\f1 \'ebar}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 air\'eb }{\i\f1 (said to apply to "inner seas of Middle-earth" in Etym, but Tolkien later used these words of the ocean).}{\f1  }{\i\f1 LT2:347 also gives }{\b\i\f1 R\'e1sa}{\i\f1  "the Sea". }{\f1 SEA-DWELLING }{
\b\f1 E\'e4mbar }{\i\f1 (name of a ship)}{\f1 , SEA-SPIRIT }{\b\f1 falmar}{\f1 /}{\b\f1 falmarin}{\f1  (pl. }{\b\f1 falmarindi}{\f1 ) (nymph), SEA-ELF }{\b\f1 Teler}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (}{\b\i\f1 Telelli\'eb}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 Telelli}{\i\f1  "Teler-folk", adj 
}{\b\i\f1 Telerin}{\i\f1  "Telerian")}{\f1 , SEAWEED }{\b\f1 \'ebaruil\'eb }{\i\f1 (also simply }{\b\i\f1 uil\'eb}{\i\f1 , see PLANT)}{\f1 , CHILD OF THE SEA }{\b\f1 oar }{\f1 (merchild), SEAWARD PRECIPICE }{\b\f1 ollo }{\f1 (cliff). }{\i\f1 
(The alternative form }{\b\i\f1 old\'f3}{\i\f1  may be archaic Quenya.) -AYAR/Letters:386/RGEO:73, UT:430, LT2:347, TELES, LT1:263, LT1:252
\par   }{\f1 SECOND #}{\b\f1 tatya}{\f1  (cf. }{\b\f1 Tatyar}{\f1 , "the Seconds", the Second Clan of the Elves), }{\b\f1 neuna}{\f1 ; THE SECOND }{\b\f1 Atani }{\f1 (}{\i\f1 sg }{\b\i\f1 Atan }{\i\f1 
- an Elvish name of Men, later only used of Men of the Three Houses of the Edain.) -WJ:420, NDEW, WJ:403
\par   }{\f1 SECRET }{\i\f1 (adj)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 muina }{\f1 (hidden), }{\b\f1 nulla}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 nulda}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 lomba}{\f1 ; SECRET }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 f\'f3l\'eb}{\f1  (secrecy); SECRECY }{\b\f1 muil\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 f\'f3l\'eb }{\f1 
(secret), SECRETIVE }{\b\f1 f\'f3lima }{\i\f1 -MUY, DUL, LT1:255, LT2:340
\par   }{\f1 SECURE }{\b\f1 varna }{\f1 (protected, safe), SECURITY }{\b\f1 varnass\'eb}{\f1 . (GL:58 has }{\b\f1 moina }{\f1 "safe, secure", but in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\f1 moina }{\f1 means "dear, familiar", and the former }{\b\f1 moina }{\f1 
seems to have been altered to }{\b\f1 muina }{\f1 "hidden, secret".)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -BAR
\par   }{\f1 SEDGE }{\b\f1 lisc\'eb }{\f1 (reed) }{\i\f1 -LT2:335  
\par   }{\f1 SEE }{\b\f1 cen- }{\f1 (behold) }{\i\f1 (future tense }{\b\i\f1 cenuva }{\i\f1 is attested}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 v\'e9la-}{\f1 ; SEE! }{\b\f1 ela }{\f1 (lo! look!) }{\i\f1 (directing sight to an actually visible object) -MC:222, Arct, WJ:362 cf. 360

\par   }{\f1 SEED }{\b\f1 erd\'eb }{\f1 (germ. }{\i\f1 Note: a homophone means "person".}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 -ER\'c9D
\par   }{\f1 SEIZE }{\b\f1 mapa- }{\f1 (grasp) }{\i\f1 This word was struck out in one of Tolkien's earlier word-lists, but in Etym it was restored. -MAP, LT2:339      
\par   }{\f1 SELF-NAME #}{\b\f1 cilmess\'eb }{\i\f1 (only pl. }{\b\i\f1 cilmessi }{\i\f1 is attested, said to mean more literally "names of personal choice": }{\b\i\f1 #cilm\'eb }{\i\f1 "choice" + }{\b\i\f1 essi }{\i\f1 
"names". PM:339 explains that "some among the exiles gave themselves names, as disguises or in reference to their own deeds and personal history: such names were called }{\f1 kilmessi }{\i\f1 'self-names'.")}{\f1 
\par   SEMI-VOWEL - the term #}{\b\f1 muss\'eb tengw\'eb}{\f1  "soft element" (only attested in the pl.: }{\b\f1 muss\'eb tengwi}{\f1 ) covers vowels, semi-vowels (}{\i\f1 y}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 w}{\f1 ) and continuants (}{\i\f1 l}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 r}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 m}{
\f1 , }{\i\f1 n}{\f1 ). -}{\i\f1 VT39:17}{\f1 
\par   SEND }{\b\f1 menta}{\f1 - (cause to go [in a desired direction]), SENDING }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 menta}{\f1  (message); THOUGHT-SENDING }{\b\f1 sanwe-menta}{\f1  (mental message) }{\i\f1 -VT41:5
\par   }{\f1 SEND FLYING }{\b\f1 horta- }{\f1 (speed, urge) }{\i\f1 -KHOR}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 SEND FOR }{\b\f1 tulta- }{\f1 (fetch, summon) }{\i\f1 -TUL
\par   }{\f1 SENTENCE }{\b\f1 quentel\'eb }{\i\f1 -LT2:348
\par   }{\f1 SEPTEMBER }{\b\f1 Yavanni\'eb }{\i\f1 -LotR:1144/1146/Silm:439
\par   }{\f1 SERIES }{\b\f1 t\'e9ma }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 t\'e9mar }{\i\f1 is attested) }{\f1 (row, line) }{\i\f1 -TE\'d1, LotR:1153  
\par   }{\f1 SERPENT }{\b\f1 l\'f3k\'eb }{\f1 (snake, dragon; }{\i\f1 "so do the Eldar name the worms of Melko[r]"}{\f1 , LT2:85). }{\i\f1 The word }{\b\i\f1 foal\'f3k\'eb }{\i\f1 is said to be a "name of a serpent t
hat guarded a treasure". The word is not capitalized, so this "name" must be a common noun and not a proper name. -LOK, LT2:340
\par   }{\f1 SERVANT -(}{\b\f1 n}{\f1 )}{\b\f1 dur }{\i\f1 (final element in compounds, e.g. }{\b\i\f1 arandur }{\i\f1 "king's servant, minister, steward". When the first part of the compound ends in }{\b\i\f1 l}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 n}{\i\f1 , or }{\b\i\f1 r}{
\i\f1 , the }{\b\i\f1 n }{\i\f1 of }{\b\i\f1 -ndur }{\i\f1 is left out). }{\f1 -}{\i\f1 Letters:386}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 SET }{\b\f1 panya- }{\f1 (fix), SET}{\i\f1  (of Sun or Moon) }{\b\f1 n\'fata-}{\f1  (sink, stoop), SET FREE }{\b\f1 lerya}{\f1 - (release, let go), SET UP }{\b\f1 tulca- }{\f1 (fix, establish; }{\i\f1 
Note: there is a homophone meaning "firm, steadfast, strong, immoveable".}{\f1 )}{\i\f1  -PAN, ND\'db, VT41:5, 6; LT1:270 cf. TULUK  
\par   }{\f1 SETTLED }{\i\f1 - be settled:}{\f1  }{\b\f1 mar- }{\f1 (abide, be fixed) }{\i\f1 -UT:317
\par   }{\f1 SEVEN }{\b\f1 otso }{\i\f1 -OT
\par   }{\f1 SHADE }{\b\f1 l\'ebo }{\i\f1 (= shadow cast by an object)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 laim\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 l\'f3min }{\f1 (shadow); SHADES OF NIGHT }{\b\f1 l\'f3m\'eb }{\f1 (Night, night-time, dusk, gloom, twilight), SHADY }{\b\f1 halda }{\f1 
(veiled, hidden, shadowed), }{\b\f1 laira}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -DAY, LT1:255, DO3
\par   }{\f1 SHADOW }{\b\f1 l\'ebo }{\i\f1 ( =shadow cast by an object) }{\f1 (shade), }{\b\f1 l\'f3min }{\f1 (shade), }{\b\f1 lumbul\'eb }{\i\f1 (=[heavy] shadow)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 fuin\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 huin\'eb }{\i\f1 (= deep shadow) }{\f1 
(gloom, darkness - according to VT41:8, }{\b\f1 fuin\'eb}{\f1  is actually a Telerin form, the proper Quenya form being }{\b\f1 huin\'eb}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 ungo }{\i\f1 (=dark shadow) }{\f1 (cloud), }{\b\f1 mordo}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 lumb\'eb }{\f1 (gloom). }{
\i\f1 "The Shadow" meaning Sauron should probably be }{\b\i\f1 Huin\'eb}{\i\f1 , as this word is associated with his coming to N\'famenor in LR:47 and SD:246/310.}{\f1  SHADOWED }{\b\f1 halda }{\f1 (veiled, hidden, shady). }{\i\f1 
-DAY, LT1:255, Nam/RGEO:67, PHUY, U\'d1G, MOR, LUM, SKAL
\par   }{\f1 SHAGGY }{\b\f1 aul\'eb }{\i\f1 (May have been obsoleted by the later [TLT] word }{\b\i\f1 aul\'eb }{\i\f1 "invention".) -LT1:249
\par   }{\f1 SHAKE }{\i\f1 (quick) }{\b\f1 rinc\'eb }{\f1 (flourish) }{\i\f1 -RIK
\par   }{\f1 SHAPE }{\i\f1 (vb)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 canta-}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 veni\'eb }{\i\f1 (infinitive? Stem }{\b\i\f1 ven-}{\i\f1 ?) }{\f1 (cut); SHAPE }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 venw\'eb}{\f1  (cut), SHAPED }{\b\f1 canta }{\i\f1 (also as quasi-suffix, e.g. }{\b\i\f1 
lassecanta }{\i\f1 "leaf-shaped"); }{\f1 SHAPED STONE }{\b\f1 ambal }{\f1 (flag) }{\i\f1 -KAT, LT1:254, MBAL
\par   }{\f1 SHARE }{\b\f1 hyanda }{\f1 (blade) }{\i\f1 -LT2:342
\par   }{\f1 SHARP }{\b\f1 laic\'eb}{\f1  (possibly a misreading for }{\b\f1 laica}{\f1 , though this is the adjective "green" in later sources), }{\b\f1 maica }{\f1 (piercing), }{\b\f1 aica }{\f1 
(fell, terrible, dire; this gloss "sharp" is isolated from one translation of }{\b\f1 Aican\'e1ro}{\f1 :) SHARP-FLAME }{\b\f1 Aican\'e1ro }{\f1 "Fell Fire, Aegnor" }{\i\f1 (so in Silm:435; MR:323 has }{\b\i\f1 Aican\'e1r}{\i\f1 
) -LAIK, Silm:434, AYAK, MR:323
\par   }{\f1 SHARP-PROWED SHIP }{\b\f1 cirya }{\f1 (see SHIP) }{\i\f1 -Silm:433 (where the spelling }{\b\i\f1 c\'edrya }{\i\f1 occurs, but all other sources have }{\b\i\f1 cirya }{\i\f1 with a short }{\b\i\f1 i}{\i\f1 , so }{\b\i\f1 c\'edrya }{\i\f1 
is likely an error by Christopher Tolkien).
\par   }{\f1 SHATTERED }{\b\f1 r\'facina }{\f1 (confused, disordered) }{\i\f1 -MC:223}{\f1 
\par   SHE \endash  see HE.
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 SHEATH }{\b\f1 vain\'eb }{\i\f1 -LT1:271
\par   }{\f1 SHEEN, THE }{\b\f1 Isil}{\b\i\f1  }{\f1 (Moon) }{\i\f1 -THIL
\par   }{\f1 SHEEP }{\b\f1 m\'e1ma }{\i\f1 (Unlike English "sheep", this word probably has a distinct plural }{\b\i\f1 *m\'e1mar}{\i\f1 .) -WJ:395
\par   }{\f1 SHELL }{\b\f1 hyalma }{\f1 (conch, horn of Ulmo) }{\i\f1 -SYAL
\par   }{\f1 SHEPHERD }{\b\f1 mavor}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (GL:58 gives }{\b\i\f1 mavar}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 ; SHEPHERDESS }{\b\f1 emerwen }{\i\f1 -LT1:268, UT:434
\par   }{\f1 SHIELD }{\b\f1 turma}{\f1 ; BOSS OF SHIELD }{\b\f1 tolmen }{\f1 (isolated round hill) }{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -TUR\'daM, LT1:269
\par   }{\f1 SHIFT }{\i\f1 (of large and heavy things:) }{\b\f1 r\'fama- }{\i\f1 (part. }{\b\i\f1 r\'famala }{\i\f1 is attested) }{\f1 (heave, move) }{\i\f1 -MC:223, 222
\par   }{\f1 SHINE }{\b\f1 cala- }{\i\f1 (fut. }{\b\i\f1 caluva }{\i\f1 is attested)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 calta-}{\f1 ; SHINE WHITE }{\b\f1 sil-}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (present tense }{\b\i\f1 s\'edla}{\i\f1 ,}{\f1  }{\i\f1 aorist sg. }{\b\i\f1 sil\'eb}{\i\f1 ,}{\f1  }{
\i\f1 aorist pl. }{\b\i\f1 silir}{\f1 ,}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 and freq. }{\b\i\f1 sis\'edla- }{\i\f1 are attested)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ninquita-}{\f1 ; SHINING WHITE }{\i\f1 (adj)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 silma }{\f1 (silver) }{\i\f1 
-LT1:254, UT:22 cf. 51, KAL, MC:223, NIK-W, SIL/LotR:94/The Return of the Shadow:324
\par   }{\f1 SHINGLE }{\b\f1 sarni\'eb }{\f1 (pebble-bank) }{\i\f1 -UT:463  
\par   }{\f1 SHIP }{\b\f1 cirya}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (defined as "sharp-prowed ship" in Silm:433; dual }{\b\i\f1 ciriat }{\i\f1 [read *}{\b\i\f1 ciryat}{\i\f1 ?] is attested in Letters:427; all numbers and cases except plural possessive }{\b\i\f1 *ciryaiva }{\i\f1 
are attested in the Plotz letter. In Silm:433, the spelling }{\b\i\f1 c\'edrya }{\i\f1 occurs, but all other sources have }{\b\i\f1 cirya }{\i\f1 with a short }{\b\i\f1 i}{\i\f1 , so }{\b\i\f1 c\'edrya }{\i\f1 is likely an error by Christopher Tolkien); }
{\b\f1 lunt\'eb}{\f1  (boat); SHIPMAN }{\b\f1 ciryaquen }{\f1 (sailor)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -KIR, LT1:249/LUT, WJ:318
\par   }{\f1 SHORE  }{\b\f1 falas }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 falass-}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 falass\'eb }{\f1 (beach, line of surf); }{\b\f1 hyapat}{\f1 ; SHORE-PIPER, SHORELAND PIPER }{\b\f1 Solosimp\'eb }{\i\f1 (pl }{\b\i\f1 Solosimpi }{\i\f1 is 
attested) -LT1:253, Silm:431, SKYAP, LT1:251, 265
\par   }{\f1 SHORT }{\b\f1 sinta }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ); SHORT STABBING SWORD }{\b\f1 ecet }{\f1 (broad-bladed sword) }{\i\f1 -STINT\'c2, UT:284
\par   }{\f1 SHOULDER }{\b\f1 r\'f3ma }{\i\f1 (Note: a homophone means "horn" or "trumpet-sound, loud sound") See also }{\f1 BACK.}{\i\f1  -LT2:335
\par   }{\f1 SHOUT }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 rama-}{\f1 ; SHOUT }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 ramb\'eb}{\f1 , SHOUT OF TRIUMPH }{\b\f1 yello }{\f1 (call), SHOUTER }{\b\f1 ramandor }{\i\f1 (but in LotR-style Quenya this would probably be a pl; sg *}{\b\i\f1 ramando}{
\i\f1 ) -LT1:259, GYEL
\par   }{\f1 SHOW }{\b\f1 tana- }{\f1 (indicate) }{\i\f1 (Note: }{\b\i\f1 tana }{\i\f1 also means "that".) -MR:385
\par   }{\f1 SICKLE }{\b\f1 circa}{\f1 ; SICKLE OF THE VALAR }{\b\f1 Valacirca }{\i\f1 (= the Great Bear, the Plough, the Big Dipper or the Wain)}{\f1 , also called }{\b\f1 Otselen}{\f1  = }{\i\f1 The Seven Stars. -KIRIK, OT
\par   }{\f1 SICK(LY) }{\b\f1 laiwa }{\f1 (ill), }{\b\f1 caimass\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 caimass\'eba }{\f1 (bedridden), }{\b\f1 engwa}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (cf. }{\b\i\f1 Engwar}{\i\f1  "The Sickly", an Elvish name for Men)}{\f1 ; SICKNESS }{\b\f1 qu\'e1m\'eb}{\f1 , }{
\b\f1 l\'edv\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 caila }{\f1 (lying in bed) }{\i\f1 -SLIW, KAY, GENG-W\'c2, Silm:122, KWAM
\par  }{\f1 SIGH }{\i\f1 see EXPIRE}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 Cf. also one of Nienna's titles: }{\b\i\f1 N\'fari}{\i\f1 , she who sighs. -LT1:263 cf. 66}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par  }{\f1 SIGN }{\b\f1 tanna}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 taina}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 tengw\'eb }{\f1 (indication, token, writing; }{\b\f1 tengw\'eb}{\f1  is also used for what we should call a phoneme - }{\i\f1 pl }{\b\i\f1 tengwi }{\i\f1 is attested}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 tehta }{
\f1 (mark [in writing], diacritic) }{\i\f1 (In LotR:1155, this word is applied to the supralinear vowel-signs of F\'ebanorian writing, and pl }{\b\i\f1 tehtar }{\i\f1 is attested.)}{\f1  SYSTEM OR CODE OF SIGNS }{\b\f1 tengwesta }{\f1 
(grammar). For various linguistic terms, see FULL SIGN, LACKING/INADEQUATE SIGN, STRIPPED/DEPRIVED SIGN.}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -MR:385, WJ:394, 395, TEK
\par   }{\f1 SIGNIFER }{\b\f1 Tancol }{\i\f1 ("the significant Star", probably = Venus)}{\f1 .}{\b\f1 
\par }{\b\i\f1   }{\f1 SILVER }{\b\f1 telp\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 telep-}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (}{\b\i\f1 tyelp\'eb}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 tyelep}{\i\f1 -}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 was the original form of the word in Noldorin Quenya, but "the form }{\b\i\f1 telpe }{\i\f1 
became usual, through the influence of Telerin; for the Teleri prized silver above gold, and their skill as silversmiths was esteemed even by the Noldor" [UT:266]. However, in Letters:426 it is stated that "the form }{\b\i\f1 tyelp\'eb }{\i\f1 
remained in Quenya" and was not wholly displaced by }{\b\i\f1 telp\'eb}{\i\f1 . LT1:268 has }{\b\i\f1 telp\'eb }{\i\f1 = }{\b\i\f1 telemp\'eb}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 Cf. also }{\b\f1 ilsa}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 (a "mystic name" of silver)}{\f1 ,}{\i\f1  }{\f1 
\'86}{\b\f1 silm\'eb}{\f1  (}{\i\f1 also meaning }{\f1 light of Silpion, starlight). SILVER }{\i\f1 (prob. adj) }{\b\f1 tinda}{\f1  (glinting), OF SILVER }{\b\f1 telepsa}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 telpina}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 telemna}{\f1 . SILVER LIGHT }{\b\f1 istel}{\f1 
, }{\b\f1 istil }{\i\f1 ("applied by the Ilkorins to starlight, probably a Q[uenya] form learned from Melian"). }{\f1 SILVER GLINT }{\b\f1 nill\'eb }{\i\f1 (a star on Varda's simulacrum covering Valinor. Spelt }{\b\i\f1 \'f1ill\'eb}{\i\f1 , i.e., }{
\b\i\f1 ngill\'eb}{\i\f1 , in MR:388, but initial }{\b\i\f1 ng }{\i\f1 had become }{\b\i\f1 n }{\i\f1 in Third Age pronunciation, and I follow the system of LotR and transcribe it accordingly. But is this word is written in Tengwar, the letter }{\b\i\f1 
noldo}{\i\f1 , not }{\b\i\f1 n\'famen}{\i\f1 , should be used to transcribe the initial }{\b\i\f1 n}{\i\f1 .) -Silm:429, KYELEP, LT1:255, SIL, TIN, MR:388
\par  }{\f1 SINEW }{\b\f1 tuo }{\f1 (muscle) }{\i\f1 -TUG
\par  }{\f1 SING }{\b\f1 lirin}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 ("I sing", 1st pers. aorist)}{\f1  (chant); SINGER }{\b\f1 nyello}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 lindo }{\f1 (singing bird); SINGERS }{\b\f1 Lindar }{\i\f1 (a name of the Teleri)}{\f1 ; SINGING }{\b\f1 lind\'eb }{\f1 
(air, tune, song), SINGING CLUSTER }{\b\f1 Lindelokt\'eb }{\f1 (labernum). }{\i\f1 This is the form given in LT1:258; Tolkien later decided that }{\b\i\f1 kt }{\i\f1 became }{\b\i\f1 ht }{\i\f1 in Quenya. Read *}{\b\i\f1 Lindeloht\'eb }{\i\f1 
in LotR-style Quenya? }{\f1  }{\i\f1 -GLIR, NYEL, LIN}{\i\f1\fs12 2}{\i\f1 , WJ:418, Silm:431, LT1:258}{\i\f1\fs12 
\par }{\i\f1  }{\f1 SINGLE }{\b\f1 erya }{\f1 (sole), SINGLY }{\b\f1 eress\'eb }{\f1 (only, alone, }{\i\f1 also as noun: }{\f1 solitude) }{\i\f1 -ERE, LT1:269
\par  }{\f1 SINGULARITY }{\b\f1 erd\'eb }{\i\f1 (used in the sense "person as a whole", body and soul. Note: a homophone means "seed, germ".) -MR:216
\par  }{\f1 SINK (of Sun and Moon) }{\b\f1 n\'fata- }{\f1 (set) }{\i\f1 -ND\'db}{\b\i\f1 
\par  }{\f1 SIP }{\b\f1 salpa- }{\f1 (lick up, sup) }{\i\f1 -S\'c1LAP
\par  }{\f1 SIRIUS }{\b\f1 Niell\'fan\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Nierninwa }{\i\f1 -LT1:262 
\par  }{\f1 SISTER }{\b\f1 seler }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 selli}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 on\'f3m\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 on\'f3n\'eb}{\f1 ; SISTER}{\i\f1  (usually not of bloodkinship) }{\b\f1 osell\'eb }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{
\b\f1  }{\f1 (associate) }{\i\f1 -THEL, N\'d4 }{\b\i\f1 
\par  }{\f1 SIT #}{\b\f1 h\'e1ra- }{\i\f1 (only pl }{\b\i\f1 h\'e1rar }{\i\f1 "are sitting" is attested. In Etym, "sit" is }{\b\i\f1 ham-}{\i\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -KHAM, UT:317, KHAM  
\par  }{\f1 SIX }{\b\f1 enqu\'eb }{\f1 -}{\i\f1 \'c9NEK
\par  }{\f1 SKIES }{\b\f1 fanyar\'eb }{\f1 (upper airs and clouds) }{\i\f1 -MC:223
\par  }{\f1 SKILL }{\b\f1 curu}{\f1 ; SKILLED }{\b\f1 mait\'eb}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 maisi}{\i\f1 )}{\f1  (handy), BE SKILLED IN DEALING WITH }{\b\f1 hanya- }{\f1 (understand, know about); SKILLFUL [?DEVICE - }{\i\f1 
Tolkien's handwriting was illegible}{\f1 ] }{\b\f1 curo}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 curu}{\f1 -) }{\b\f1  -}{\i\f1 Silm:429, MA3, KHAN, VT41:10
\par  }{\f1 SKIN }{\b\f1 helma }{\f1 (fell) }{\i\f1 (}{\b\i\f1 parma }{\i\f1 in LT2:346 is obsolete; see BARK) -SKEL
\par }{\f1  SKY }{\b\f1 vilya }{\i\f1 (older [MET] }{\b\i\f1 wilya}{\i\f1 ) }{\f1 (air),}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 hell\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ilw\'eb }{\f1 (heavens), }{\b\f1 telimbo }{\f1 (canopy), }{\b\f1 taim\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 taimi\'eb}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (LT2:348 gives }{
\b\i\f1 ilu}{\i\f1 , but the meaning of this word was later changed - Tolkien decided that }{\b\i\f1 Il\'favatar }{\i\f1 means "All-Father", not "Sky-Father" as he originally thought.) }{\f1 "SKY-BRIDGE" (i.e., rainbow) }{\b\f1 helyanw\'eb }{\i\f1 
-LotR:1157, 3EL, LT1:255, LT2:348, LT1:268
\par  }{\f1 SLACKEN }{\b\f1 lehta}{\f1 -, }{\b\f1 leuca- }{\f1 (loose)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (Note: }{\b\i\f1 leuca }{\i\f1 is also a noun meaning "snake". Anyway, }{\b\i\f1 leuca}{\i\f1 - in Etym is likely a misreading for *}{\b\i\f1 lenca}{\i\f1 
-. The certain form }{\b\i\f1 lehta}{\i\f1 - is to be preferred.)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -LEK
\par  }{\f1 SLASH }{\b\f1 ciriss\'eb }{\f1 (gash) }{\i\f1 -KIRIS
\par  }{\f1 SLAVE }{\b\f1 m\'f3l }{\f1 (thrall) }{\i\f1 -M\'d4
\par  }{\f1 SLAY }{\b\f1 mac- }{\i\f1 -LT1:259 (but in VT39.11, this verb is translated "hews with a sword")
\par  }{\f1 SLEEP }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 f\'fam\'eb}{\i\f1 . (This word points to *}{\b\i\f1 fum- }{\i\f1 as the stem of the verb "to sleep".)  }{\f1 FLOWER OF SLEEP }{\i\f1 - see POPPY. -LT1:253
\par  }{\f1 SLENDER }{\b\f1 nind\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 teren}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 teren\'eb }{\i\f1 -NIN-DI, TER
\par  }{\f1 SLIDE DOWN }{\b\f1 talta- }{\f1 (slip, collapse) }{\i\f1 -MC:223
\par  }{\f1 SLIP }{\b\f1 talta- }{\f1 (slide down, collapse) }{\i\f1 -MC:223
\par }{\b\i\f1  }{\f1 SLOPE (vb) }{\b\f1 talta-}{\f1 ; SLOPE (noun) }{\b\f1 pend\'eb}{\f1  (downslope, declivity), }{\b\f1 ampend\'eb }{\f1 (upward slope), SLOPING DOWN }{\b\f1 penda}{\f1  (inclined) -}{\i\f1 PEN
\par  }{\f1 SLOW }{\b\f1 lenca }{\i\f1 -LT2:341
\par  }{\f1 SLUMBER }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 lor-}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 muru-}{\f1 , SLUMBER }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 l\'f3r\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 murm\'eb}{\f1 , SLUMBROUS }{\b\f1 lorda }{\f1 (drowsy), }{\b\f1 murm\'eba }{\i\f1 -LT1:259, LOS, LT1:259, 260
\par *}{\f1 SMALL }{\b\f1 pitya }{\i\f1 (never translated, but }{\b\i\f1 Pitya-naucor }{\i\f1 is glossed "petty-dwarves", and }{\b\i\f1 pica }{\i\f1 "small spot" must be derived from the same root.) Cf. also }{\b\i\f1 nauca}{\i\f1 , an adjecti
ve "especially applied to things that though in themselves full-grown were smaller or shorter than their kind, and were hard, twisted, or ill-shapen."}{\f1  }{\i\f1 LT1:256 has an adjective }{\b\i\f1 inya }{\i\f1 
"small", but this is probably not a valid word in LotR-style Quenya (in which language }{\b\i\f1 *inya }{\i\f1 may mean "my, mine".) -PIK, WJ:389, 413}{\f1 
\par  SMALL STONE }{\b\f1 sar }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 sardi}{\i\f1 ) -SAR
\par  }{\f1 SMEARED }{\b\f1 p\'far\'eba }{\f1 (discoloured) }{\i\f1 -MC:223
\par  }{\f1 SMITH }{\b\f1 tano }{\f1 (craftsman), SMITH OF THE WORLD }{\b\f1 Talca Marwa }{\i\f1 (a title of Aul\'eb)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -TAN, LT1:266
\par  }{\f1 SMOOTH }{\b\f1 pasta }{\i\f1 -PATH
\par  }{\f1 SMOULDERING HEAT }{\b\f1 yulm\'eb }{\f1 (red [?heat] }{\i\f1 - Tolkien's handwriting was illegible}{\f1 ); SMOULDERING WOOD }{\b\f1 y\'fala }{\f1 (ember) }{\i\f1 -YUL
\par }{\b\i\f1  }{\f1 SNAKE }{\b\f1 ango }{\f1 (pl. }{\b\f1 angwi}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 leuca}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 l\'f3k\'eb}{\i\f1  }{\f1 (serpent, dragon; }{\i\f1 "so do the Eldar name the worms of Melko[r]"}{\f1 , LT2:85) }{\i\f1 -ANGWA, LotR:1149, LT2:340}{\b\i\f1 

\par }{\b\f1  }{\f1 SNARE }{\b\f1 neuma }{\i\f1 -SNEW
\par  }{\f1 SNARL }{\b\f1 yarra }{\f1 (growl) }{\i\f1 -MC:223
\par  }{\f1 SNOUT }{\b\f1 mundo }{\f1 (nose, cape) }{\i\f1 -MBUD
\par  }{\f1 SNOW }{\b\f1 loss\'eb }{\i\f1 (spesifically "fallen snow", also adjective "snow-white"; }{\f1 \'86}{\b\f1 olos}{\f1 , \'86}{\b\f1 oloss\'eb}{\f1 .}{\i\f1  Etym also gives }{\b\i\f1 niqu\'eb}{\i\f1 
, but this word is obsoleted by a statement in WJ:417: "}{\f1 nique}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 does not refer to snow, but to cold". This statement may obsolete }{\b\i\f1 niquetil }{\i\f1 "snowcap" in LT1:266. Is }{\b\i\f1 niquis }{\i\f1 
"snow" from the same source a valid word? GL:35 has }{\b\i\f1 f\'e1w\'eb}{\i\f1  "snow" and }{\b\i\f1 fauta}{\i\f1  "it snows".)}{\f1  LIGHT SNOW }{\b\f1 is}{\f1 , SNOW-WHITE }{\b\f1 loss\'eb }{\i\f1 (which may also be the noun "snow")}{\f1 , SNOWDROP }{
\b\f1 nieninqu\'eb}{\i\f1  (lit. "white tear") -RGEO:69, GOL\'d3S, NIK-W-, NEI, LT1:256, LT1:262/266       
\par  }{\f1 SOAP }{\b\f1 lipsa}{\f1  -}{\i\f1 LIB}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 
\par  }{\f1 SOFT }{\b\f1 muss\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 maxa }{\f1 (pliant), }{\b\f1 moica}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -VT39:17, MASAG, GL:58
\par  }{\f1 SOIL 1. }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 kemen }{\f1 (earth), 2. }{\i\f1 (vb)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 vahta- }{\f1 (stain), SOILED }{\b\f1 v\'e1ra }{\f1 (dirty) }{\i\f1 -LT1:257, WA3 
\par  }{\f1 SOLE }{\b\f1 erya }{\f1 (single), SOLITUDE }{\b\f1 eress\'eb }{\i\f1 (also as adverb: }{\f1 single, only, alone)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -ERE cf. LT1:269
\par  }{\f1 SOLE OF FOOT }{\b\f1 tall\'fan\'eb }{\i\f1 (the form }{\b\i\f1 talas }{\i\f1 in LT2 is probably obsolete) -RUN, LT2:347
\par  }{\f1 SOLEMN PROMISE }{\b\f1 vanda }{\f1 (oath, pledge) }{\i\f1 -UT:317
\par  }{\f1 SOLITARY }{\b\f1 erda }{\f1 (deserted) }{\i\f1 -LT1:269
\par  }{\f1 SOLITUDE }{\b\f1 eress\'eb }{\f1 (}{\i\f1 also as adverb: }{\f1 singly, only, alone) }{\i\f1 -ERE, LT1:269
\par  }{\f1 SOMBRE }{\b\f1 morna }{\f1 (black, gloomy, dark) }{\i\f1 -MOR
\par  }{\f1 SON }{\b\f1 yondo}{\f1  (male descendant), }{\i\f1 (suffix:) }{\b\f1 -ion}{\f1 , e.g. }{\b\f1 Finwion }{\f1 "son of Finw\'eb".}{\i\f1  Cf. also the vocative }{\b\i\f1 yonya *}{\i\f1 "my son", a contraction of *}{\b\i\f1 yondonya}{\i\f1 
. (The forms }{\b\i\f1 v\'f4}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 vondo }{\i\f1 "son" in LT2 are certainly obsolete, as are the notions that }{\b\i\f1 yondo }{\i\f1 meant "(great) grandson" and that }{\b\i\f1 y\'f4-}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 yond- }{\i\f1 
"son" was used only in poetry. But LT2 does confirm that }{\b\i\f1 -ion }{\i\f1 was "very common...in patronymics".) }{\f1 SON OF THE DARK }{\i\f1 (= Morgoth) }{\b\f1 morion}{\i\f1 -YO, MR:217, LR:61, LT2:336, 344, LT1:260 cf. FS
\par }{\b\f1  }{\f1 SONG }{\b\f1 lind\'eb}{\f1  (air, tune, singing), #}{\b\f1 l\'edr\'eb}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 (only attested in the instrumental case: }{\b\i\f1 l\'edrinen}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 lirilla }{\f1 (lay). }{\i\f1 See also MUSIC. -GLIN, Nam, LT1:258

\par  }{\f1 SOON }{\b\f1 rato }{\i\f1 -Arct             
\par  }{\f1 SOPE }{\b\f1 lipsa }{\i\f1 -LIB
\par  }{\f1 SORROW }{\b\f1 ny\'e9r\'eb }{\f1 (grief). Pl. perhaps *}{\b\f1 ny\'e9rer }{\f1 not *}{\b\f1 ny\'e9ri}{\f1 ; cf. the similar formation }{\b\f1 ty\'e1v\'eb }{\f1 "taste" pl. }{\b\f1 ty\'e1ver}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 -GL:60 
\par  }{\f1 SOUL }{\b\f1 f\'eba }{\f1 (spirit; }{\i\f1 pl }{\b\i\f1 f\'ebar }{\i\f1 is attested. In MR:330, Tolkien notes that }{\b\i\f1 f\'eba }{\i\f1 is "roughly but not exactly equivalent to...'soul'."}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 -MR:349, 218, cf. Silm:431
\par  }{\f1 SOUND }{\i\f1 (verb, "to sound")}{\f1  }{\b\f1 lamya}{\f1 -; SOUND }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 lamma}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (= sound in general?)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 #hlon }{\i\f1 (only pl. }{\b\i\f1 hloni }{\i\f1 
is attested; the word is used of the sounds of a language)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 r\'f3ma }{\i\f1 (= loud sound, trumpet-sound. Note: }{\b\i\f1 r\'f3ma }{\i\f1 also means "shoulder")}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 l\'e1ma }{\i\f1 (according to Etym = "ringing sound, echo", b
ut see below); SOUND-TASTE }{\b\i\f1 l\'e1maty\'e1v\'eb }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 l\'e1maty\'e1ver }{\i\f1 is attested), i.e., "individual pleasure in the sounds and forms of words". Tolkien seems undecided about the exact meaning of }{\b\i\f1 l\'e1ma}{
\i\f1 . Etym gives "ringing sound, echo"; in WJ:416 it is said that the stem L
AMA refers "especially to vocal sounds, but was applied only to those that were confused or inarticulate. It was generally used to describe the various cries of beasts." But the word }{\b\i\f1 l\'e1maty\'e1v\'eb }{\i\f1 
"sound-taste", by which an Elf chose or made a name for him/herself [see NAME-CHOOSING], seems to imply that }{\b\i\f1 l\'e1ma }{\i\f1 can also be used of artuculated speech. -LAM, WJ:394, ROM, MR:215, 216
\par }{\f1  SOUTH }{\b\f1 hyarmen}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (LT2:248 also gives }{\b\i\f1 Sah\'f3ra}{\i\f1 , but this is hardly a valid word in Tolkien's later Quenya);}{\f1  SOUTHERN }{\b\f1 hyarmenya}{\f1 , "SOUTH-VICTOR" }{\b\f1 Hyarmendacil }{\i\f1 
(one of the Kings of Gondor)}{\f1 , SOUTHEASTLANDS }{\b\f1 Hyarrostar}{\f1 , SOUTHWESTLANDS }{\b\f1 Hyarnustar }{\i\f1 (regions in N\'famenor) -KHYAR/LotR:1157, LotR:1075/1082, UT:165, 446
\par  }{\f1 SOW }{\b\f1 rerin}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("I sow", 1st person aorist)}{\f1 , pa.t. }{\b\f1 rend\'eb}{\f1  -}{\i\f1 RED
\par  }{\f1 SPARK - }{\i\f1 make/cause to spark: }{\b\f1 tinta- }{\f1 (kindle)}{\i\f1 . }{\f1 SPARK }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 tinw\'eb}{\f1  (sparkle). }{\i\f1 -TIN, Silm:438
\par  }{\f1 SPARKLE }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 tintina}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 tintinar }{\i\f1 is attested)}{\f1 , MAKE TO SPARKLE }{\b\f1 tinta- }{\f1 (kindle);  SPARKLE, SPARK }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 tinw\'eb}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 (often = "star") -TIN, Silm:438

\par  }{\f1 SPEAK }{\b\f1 quet- }{\f1 (pa.t. }{\b\f1 quent\'eb}{\f1 ) (say, talk)}{\i\f1  -LT2:348
\par  }{\f1 SPEAR }{\b\f1 eht\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ecco}{\f1 ; SPEAR-HEAD }{\b\f1 neht\'eb }{\f1 (gore, wedge, narrow promontory), }{\b\f1 nasta}{\f1  (gore, point, triangle),}{\b\f1  }{\f1 SPEARMAN }{\b\f1 ehtyar }{\i\f1 -EK, SNAS, UT:282
\par  }{\f1 SPECIES }{\b\f1 nostal\'eb }{\f1 (kind) }{\i\f1 -LT1:272
\par  }{\f1 SPEED }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 horta- }{\f1 (urge, send flying), SPEEDING }{\b\f1 hortal\'eb}{\f1  (urging) }{\i\f1 -KHOR
\par  }{\f1 SPELLING }{\b\f1 tencel\'eb }{\f1 (writing system) }{\i\f1 -TEK
\par  }{\f1 SPIDER }{\b\f1 liant\'eb }{\i\f1 (so in Etym; in LT1:271, }{\b\i\f1 liant\'eb }{\i\f1 is glossed "tendril")}{\f1 ; SPIDER FILAMENT }{\b\f1 lia }{\i\f1 (Note: }{\b\i\f1 lia}{\i\f1 -}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 is also the verb "twine")}{\f1 ; SPIDER'S WEB }{
\b\f1 ungw\'eb }{\i\f1 (but in LT1:271, }{\b\i\f1 ungw\'eb }{\i\f1 is glossed "spider") -SLIG, LotR:1157
\par  }{\f1 SPIKE }{\b\f1 nass\'eb }{\f1 (thorn), }{\b\f1 tinda}{\f1 ;}{\b\f1  }{\f1 ROW OF SPIKES}{\i\f1  (or teeth) }{\b\i\f1 carcass\'eb}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 carcaras }{\i\f1 -NAS, LT1:258, LT2:344
\par  }{\f1 SPINDRIFT }{\b\f1 wing\'eb }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 wingi}{\f1 -)}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (crest [of wave], foam) }{\i\f1 -LT1:273 cf. WIG
\par  }{\f1 SPIRANT CONSONANT }{\b\f1 surya }{\i\f1 -SUS
\par  }{\f1 SPIRIT }{\b\f1 f\'eba }{\i\f1 (= the spirit or "soul" of an incarnate, normally housed in a body;}{\f1  }{\i\f1 pl }{\b\i\f1 f\'ebar }{\i\f1 is attested}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 \'ebala }{\i\f1 ("being", pl. }{\b\i\f1 e\'e4lar }{\i\f1 is attested. }{
\b\i\f1 E\'e4lar }{\i\f1 are spirits whose natural state it is to exist without a physical body, e.g. Balrogs)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 s\'fal\'eb}{\b\i\f1  }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (earlier [MET] }{\b\i\f1 th\'fal\'eb}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 \'de\'fal
\'eb}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\f1 , }{\b\f1 manu }{\i\f1 (= departed spirit; LT1:260 has }{\b\i\f1 m\'e1n\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 fair\'eb }{\i\f1 (= spirit in general, as opposed to matter, or a phantom or disembodied spirit, when seen as a pale shape. Pl. }
{\b\i\f1 fairi }{\i\f1 is attested)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 viliss\'eb}{\f1 .}{\i\f1  A person's "spirit" meaning his or her general personality and attitude may be rendered by the word }{\b\i\f1 \'f3r\'eb}{\i\f1 , in LotR defined as "heart, inner
 mind" (q.v.), cf. PM:337, where it is said that "there dwelt in her [Galadriel] the noble and generous spirit (}{\f1 \'f3r\'eb) }{\i\f1 of the Vanyar"}{\f1 .}{\i\f1  }{\f1 FIELD-SPIRIT }{\b\f1 Nermi }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 Nermir }{\i\f1 is attested. The 
}{\b\i\f1 Nermir }{\i\f1 are "fays of the meads".) }{\f1 SPIRIT-IMPULSE }{\b\f1 f\'ebafelm\'eb}{\f1  (impulses originating with the spirit, e.g. love, pity, anger, hate). }{\i\f1 
-MR:349, 218, 165; cf. Silm:431; LotR:1157, MAN, MC:223, MR:349, GL:23, LT1:260, VT41:19 cf. 13
\par }{\b\f1  }{\f1 SPIT }{\b\f1 piuta }{\i\f1 -PIW
\par  }{\f1 SPLIT }{\b\f1 sanca }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (cleft) }{\i\f1 -STAK
\par  }{\f1 SPONGE }{\b\f1 hwan }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 hwand}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 hwandi}{\f1 ) (fungus) }{\i\f1 -SWAD
\par  }{\f1 SPORT }{\b\f1 tyali\'eb }{\f1 (game, play) }{\i\f1 -TYAL
\par  }{\f1 SPOT }{\b\f1 men }{\f1 (place }{\i\f1 - Tolkien may have rejected this word, see PLACE)}{\f1 , SMALL SPOT }{\b\f1 pica }{\f1 (dot) }{\i\f1 -MEN, PIK
\par   }{\f1 SPRAY }{\i\f1 (of fall or fountain) }{\b\f1 ross\'eb }{\f1 (fine rain, dew) }{\i\f1 -Letters:282 cf. ROS
\par   }{\f1 SPREAD }{\b\f1 palu}{\f1 -, }{\b\f1 palya- }{\f1 (open wide, extend, expand) }{\i\f1 -PAL
\par   }{\f1 SPRING}{\i\f1  (vb)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 tuia- }{\f1 (sprout); SPRING }{\i\f1 (noun; but for the season, see SPRING-TIME below)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 ehtel\'eb }{\f1 (fountain, issue of water), SPRING OF WATER }{\b\f1 capalinda}{\f1 
, WATER FALLING OUT SWIFTLY FROM A ROCKY SPRING }{\b\f1 celuss\'eb }{\f1 (freshlet); SPRING, SPRING-TIME }{\b\f1 tuil\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (this word li
terally means "budding, also collectively - buds, new shoots, fresh green" [LT1:269]. Also used = dayspring, early morn. In the Calendar of Imladris, }{\b\i\f1 tuil\'eb }{\i\f1 
was a precisely defined period of 54 days, but the word was also used without any exact definition. Besides }{\b\i\f1 tuil\'eb}{\i\f1 , LT1:269 also has }{\b\i\f1 tuili\'e9r\'eb}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1  FIRST BEGINNING OF SPRING }{\b\f1 coir\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
("stirring", according to the Calendar of Imladris a period of 54 days in early spring)}{\f1 ; "SPRING-SINGER" }{\i\f1 (i.e., swallow) }{\b\f1 tuilindo}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -TUY/LotR 1141, 1145, KEL, UT:426, LT1:260, Silm:429, LT2:338/LT1:269, VT39:7
\par   }{\f1 SPROUT }{\i\f1 (vb)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 tuia}{\f1  (spring), *}{\b\f1 lohta- }{\i\f1 (corrected from the actual reading }{\b\i\f1 lokta }{\i\f1 because Tolkien later decided that }{\b\i\f1 kt }{\i\f1 became }{\b\i\f1 ht }{\i\f1 in Quenya)}{\f1 
 (put forth leaves or flowers); SPROUT }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 tuima }{\f1 (bud) }{\i\f1 -TUY, LT:258
\par }{\f1   SQUAT }{\b\f1 haca}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 -GL:47
\par   }{\f1 STABBING SWORD }{\i\f1 (short) }{\b\f1 ecet }{\f1 (broad-bladed sword) }{\i\f1 -UT:284/432
\par   }{\f1 STAFF }{\i\f1 - LT1:264 has }{\b\i\f1 vandl}{\i\f1 , but the cluster }{\b\i\f1 ndl }{\i\f1 cannot occur in LotR-style Quenya. Read }{\b\i\f1 *vandil}{\i\f1 ?
\par   }{\f1 STAIN }{\i\f1 (vb)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 vahta-}{\f1 , STAIN }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 vax\'eb }{\i\f1 -WA3
\par   }{\f1 STAND ASIDE! }{\b\f1 heca! }{\f1 (be gone!). }{\i\f1 Also with pronominal affixes: sg }{\b\i\f1 hecat}{\i\f1 , pl }{\b\i\f1 hecal }{\i\f1 "you stand aside!"}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -WJ:364     
\par  }{\f1  STANDARD }{\b\f1 tulw\'eb }{\f1 (standard, pole)}{\b\f1  }{\f1 -}{\i\f1 LT1:270
\par   }{\f1 STAR }{\b\f1 elen}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (normal pl }{\b\i\f1 eleni}{\i\f1 , but occasionally }{\f1 \'86}{\b\i\f1 eldi }{\i\f1 in verse; allative }{\b\i\f1 elenna }{\i\f1 and pl ablative }{\b\i\f1 elenillor }{\i\f1 are attested), }{\f1 \'86}{\b\f1 \'e9l }{
\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 \'e9li }{\i\f1 is mentioned)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tinw\'eb}{\i\f1  (properly = sparkle)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 \'edl\'eb}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (Note: in Etym }{\b\i\f1 elen }{\i\f1 is said to be poetic, but Tolkien later concluded that }{\b\i\f1 elen }{
\i\f1 was "the normal word for a star on the actual firmanent", the poetic word being }{\b\i\f1 \'e9l }{\i\f1 instead. According to MR:388, a }{\b\i\f1 tinw\'eb }{\i\f1 was one of the "apparent stars" on Varda's simulacrum covering Valinor, also called }{
\b\i\f1 nill\'eb }{\i\f1 or "silver glint". Etym mentions the words }{\b\i\f1 ellen }{\i\f1 and }{\b\i\f1 elena }{\i\f1 without glossing them, but according to Silm:431 }{\b\i\f1 elena }{\i\f1 is an adjective meaning "of the stars".)}{\f1  TWINKLING STAR 
}{\b\f1 tingilya}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tingilind\'eb}{\f1 , HAVING MANY STARS }{\b\f1 lintitinw\'eb}{\f1 ; STARLIKE}{\b\f1  elv\'eba}{\i\f1  (pl. }{\b\i\f1 elvi\'eb}{\i\f1  is attested)}{\f1 ; STARWARDS }{\b\f1 elenna}{\i\f1  (}{\b\i\f1 Elenna }{\i\f1 or }{
\b\i\f1 Elennan\'f3r\'eb}{\i\f1 , "the land named Starwards", a name of N\'famenor)}{\f1 ; STARLIGHT }{\b\f1 silm\'eb }{\f1 (light of Silpion); STARCROWNED, CROWNED WITH STARS }{\i\f1 (a name of Taniquetil) }{\b\f1 Elerr\'edna }{\i\f1 
(so in Silm:42; Etym has }{\b\i\f1 Eler\'edna}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 ; STAR-QUEEN }{\i\f1 (=Varda) }{\b\f1 Elent\'e1ri}{\f1 ; STARLIT DUSK, STARRY}{\i\f1  }{\f1 TWILIGHT }{\b\f1 tind\'f3m\'eb}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 See also }{\f1 *STELLAR. }{\i\f1 
-EL, Silm:313, MC:222 cf. 215, TIN, WJ:362, UT:317, LotR:1157, LT1:269, MC:223, Silm:42, DOMO, Silm:438}{\f1 
\par   STATE }{\b\f1 indo}{\f1  (perhaps especially a state of mind, since }{\i\f1 indo}{\f1  is translated "heart, mood" in the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1 , stem }{\i\f1 ID}{\f1 ) -}{\i\f1 VT39:23
\par   }{\f1 STATUTE }{\b\f1 namna }{\i\f1 -MR:258
\par   }{\f1 STEADFAST }{\b\f1 tulca }{\f1 (firm, strong, immoveable; }{\i\f1 Note:}{\f1  }{\i\f1 there is a homophone meaning "fix, set up, establish"}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 v\'f3rima}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 voronda }{\f1 ("steadf
ast in allegiance, in keeping oath or promise, faithful"). }{\i\f1 -TULUK cf. LT1:270, UT:317
\par   }{\f1 STEADY }{\b\f1 tulunca }{\f1 (firm) }{\i\f1 -LT1:270
\par   }{\f1 STEEL }{\b\f1 er\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 eren }{\i\f1 (meaning either iron or steel)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 yaisa}{\i\f1  -LT1:252, GL:37
\par   }{\f1 STEEP }{\b\f1 aiqua}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 oronta }{\f1 -}{\i\f1 AYAK, LT1:256
\par  *}{\f1 STELLAR }{\b\f1 elenya }{\i\f1 (no gloss is actually given; the word is simply defined as "an adjective referring to stars". There are also the adjectives }{\b\i\f1 elda }{\i\f1 and }{\b\i\f1 elena}{\i\f1 
, translated "of the stars". But in normal Quenya, }{\b\i\f1 elda }{\i\f1 primarily means "Elf", pl. }{\b\i\f1 Eldar}{\i\f1 . Use }{\b\i\f1 elenya }{\i\f1 or }{\b\i\f1 elena}{\i\f1 .) -WJ:362, Silm:431
\par   }{\f1 STEM }{\b\f1 telco }{\f1 (leg) }{\i\f1 -LotR:1154
\par   }{\f1 STEWARD }{\b\f1 arandur }{\f1 (king's servant, minister) }{\i\f1 -Letters:386, UT:313
\par   }{\f1 STICK TO }{\b\f1 himya- }{\f1 (cleave to, abide by), STICKING }{\b\f1 himba }{\f1 (adhering) }{\i\f1 -KHIM}{\f1 
\par   STIFF }{\b\f1 norna }{\f1 (tough), }{\b\f1 tarya}{\f1 ; STIFF, DRY GRASS }{\b\f1 sara }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (bent) }{\i\f1 -WJ:413, T\'c1RAG, STAR
\par   }{\f1 STILL }{\i\f1 (= *"yet, despite that", not in the sense "unmoving":) }{\b\f1 er }{\f1 (only, one, alone, but, still) }{\i\f1 -LT1:269
\par   }{\f1 STING }{\b\f1 nasta- }{\f1 (prick) }{\i\f1 -NAS    
\par }{\f1   STINK }{\b\f1 yolo}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 -GL:41
\par   }{\f1 STIRRING }{\b\f1 coir\'eb }{\i\f1 (according to the Calendar of Imladris a period of 54 days in early spring)}{\b\i\f1  
\par }{\i\f1 -LotR:1141, 1142                   
\par   }{\f1 STONE }{\b\f1 ondo }{\i\f1 (defined as stone "as a material"}{\f1  }{\i\f1 in Etym, but used of natural rocks in MC:222: }{\b\i\f1 ondoliss\'eb morn\'eb}{\i\f1 , *"upon dark rocks". LT1 and LT2 has simply }{\b\i\f1 on}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 ondo }{
\i\f1 "stone, a stone")}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 sar }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 sard-}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (= small stone)}{\f1 ; OF STONE }{\b\f1 sarna}{\f1 . STONE SONG }{\b\f1 Ondolind\'eb }{\f1 (Gondolin). }{\i\f1 See also }{\f1 ELFSTONE, FLINTSTONE. }{\i\f1 
-GONOD (see GOND), Silm:431, LT1:254/LT2:342, SAR, Silm:415
\par   }{\f1 STOOP }{\b\f1 n\'fata- }{\i\f1 (sink, set [of Sun and Moon]) -LT1:263 cf. ND\'db
\par   }{\f1 STOP }{\b\f1 hauta- }{\f1 (take a rest, cease), }{\b\f1 pusta- }{\f1 (put a stop to, }{\i\f1 but also intr:}{\f1  cease), }{\b\f1 t\'e1p\'eb }{\i\f1 (3 pers sg pres; pa.t. }{\b\i\f1 tamp\'eb }{\i\f1 is given)}{\f1  (block), STOP SHORT }{\b\f1 
nuhta- }{\f1 (stunt, prevent from coming to completion, not allow to continue). FULL STOP }{\i\f1 ("in punctuation" - in F\'ebanorian writing probably the symbol }{\b\f1 :}{\i\f1 ) }{\b\f1 putta}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 pusta}{\f1 ; STOPPED CONSONANT }{\i\f1 
(i.e., plosive consonant?) }{\b\f1 punta}{\f1 ; STOPPER }{\b\f1 tampa }{\i\f1 -KHAW, PUS, TAP, WJ:413
\par   }{\f1 STORM }{\b\f1 raumo }{\i\f1 (glossed "[noise of a] storm" in MC:223)}{\f1 
\par   STORY }{\b\f1 quenta}{\f1  (narrative, history) }{\i\f1 -KWET/VT39:16}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 STRAIGHT }{\b\f1 t\'e9ra }{\f1 (right), }{\b\f1 lenwa }{\f1 (long, thin, narrow); STRAIGHT LINE }{\b\f1 t\'eba}{\f1  (road) }{\i\f1 (note: not to be confused with the verb }{\b\i\f1 t\'eba}{\i\f1 - "indicate")}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -TE3, TE\'d1
, LT2:341
\par   }{\f1 STRAP }{\b\f1 latta }{\i\f1 (Note: a homophone means "hole, pit") -LATH
\par   }{\f1 STRAY }{\b\f1 ranya}{\f1 -; STRAYING }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 r\'e1n\'eb }{\f1 (wandering) }{\i\f1 (pl. probably }{\b\i\f1 *r\'e1ner }{\i\f1 not }{\b\i\f1 r\'e1ni}{\i\f1 ; cf. the similar formation }{\b\i\f1 ty\'e1v\'eb }{\i\f1 "taste" pl }{\b\i\f1 
ty\'e1ver}{\i\f1 .) -RAN}{\f1 
\par   STREAM }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 celu- }{\f1 ("streem out swiftly"; }{\i\f1 there is also a noun }{\b\i\f1 celu }{\i\f1 "stream"}{\f1 ), STREAM }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 celum\'eb }{\f1 (flow, flowing, flood, tide), }{\b\f1 celu}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 s\'edr\'eb }{\f1 
(river); STREAM IN THE WIND }{\b\f1 hlapu- }{\f1 (fly in the wind; }{\i\f1 part. }{\b\i\f1 hl\'e1pula }{\i\f1 is attested}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 -UT:446, LT1:265, MC:223, 222/LT1:257
\par   }{\f1 STRECH }{\b\f1 lenu-}{\f1 ;}{\i\f1  }{\f1 STRETCH OUT *}{\b\f1 rahta- }{\f1 (reach)}{\i\f1  (Corrected from the actual reading }{\b\i\f1 rakta}{\i\f1 ; Tolkien later decided that }{\b\i\f1 kt }{\i\f1 became }{\b\i\f1 ht }{\i\f1 
in Quenya) -LT1:341, 335
\par   }{\f1 STREET }{\b\f1 mall\'eb }{\i\f1 -MBAL, LT1:263
\par   }{\f1 STRENGTH }{\i\f1 (physical) }{\b\f1 tuo }{\i\f1 -TUG}{\f1 
\par   STRENGTHENING }{\b\f1 antoryam\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (used of various manipulations of a stem, such as lengthening vowels or consonants or turning a consonant or a vowel into a "blend" [see BLEND])}{\f1  -}{\i\f1 VT:39:9}{\f1 
\par   STRETCHED }{\b\f1 taina}{\f1  (elongated, lengthened, extended) }{\i\f1 -VT39:7 cf. TAY}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 STRIDER }{\b\f1 Telcontar }{\i\f1 -MR:897}{\f1 
\par   STRIPPED #}{\b\f1 racina}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (only pl. }{\b\i\f1 racin\'eb}{\i\f1  is attested)}{\f1  (deprived). STRIPPED SIGN #}{\b\f1 racina tengw\'eb}{\f1  (only pl. }{\b\f1 racin\'eb tengwi}{\f1 
 is attested). Also translated "deprived sign", this was in early Elvish analysis of Quenya the term for a consonant with no following vowel; the vowel was held to have disappeared or been omitted. \-}{\i\f1 -VT39:16}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 STRIPPED BARE }{\b\f1 helda }{\f1 (naked) }{\i\f1 -SKEL
\par   }{\f1 STROKE }{\i\f1 ("of pen of brush [\'b4]}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 when not used as long mark") }{\b\f1 tecco }{\i\f1 -TEK
\par   }{\f1 STRONG }{\b\f1 tulca }{\f1 (firm, immoveable, steadfast. }{\i\f1 Note:}{\f1  }{\i\f1 there is a homophone meaning "fix, set up, establish"}{\f1 ), STRONG }{\i\f1 (physically) }{\b\f1 polda }{\f1 (burley), STRONG PLACE }{\b\f1 sarn\'eb -}{\i\f1 
TULUK, POL, SAR
\par   }{\f1 STUNT }{\b\f1 nuhta}{\f1 -}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (prevent from coming to completion, stop short, not allow to continue" }{\i\f1 -WJ:413}{\f1 
\par   STUNTED }{\b\f1 nauca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -VT39:7
\par   }{\f1 SUBLIME, THE }{\b\f1 Varda }{\i\f1 (this word should probably not be used as a normal adjective. It is also translated "the Lofty".) -WJ:402
\par  }{\f1  SUCCESSOR }{\b\f1 neuro }{\f1 (follower) }{\i\f1 -NDEW
\par   }{\f1 SUFFICE }{\b\f1 farya- }{\f1 (pa.t. }{\b\f1 farn\'eb}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (Note: #}{\b\i\f1 farn\'eb }{\i\f1 also means "dwelling")}{\f1 ; SUFFICIENCY }{\b\f1 f\'e1r\'eb}{\f1  (plenitude, all that is wanted), SUFFICIENT }{\b\f1 far\'eba }{\f1 (enough) }
{\i\f1 -PHAR
\par   }{\f1 SUFFOCATE }{\b\f1 quoro- }{\f1 (choke) }{\i\f1 -LT1:264
\par   }{\f1 SUMMER }{\b\f1 lair\'eb }{\i\f1 (Note: a homophone means "poem". In the Calendar of Imladris, }{\b\i\f1 lair\'eb }{\i\f1 was a precisely defined period of 72 days, but the word was also used without any exact definition), }{\b\f1 saiwen }{\i\f1 
(cf. }{\b\i\f1 saiwa }{\i\f1 "hot".) }{\f1 "EVER-SUMMER" }{\b\f1 oiolair\'eb}{\f1 , "SUMMER-SNOW-WHITE" }{\b\f1 laireloss\'eb }{\i\f1 (evergreen trees brought to N\'famenor by the Eldar) -LotR:1141, 1145, Letters:282, LT1:265, UT:167, 458, UT:167, 449

\par   }{\f1 SUMMIT }{\i\f1 (of a mountain)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 ingor}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (PM:340)}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 LT1:256 gives }{\b\i\f1 orm\'eb }{\i\f1 "crest, summit", but in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 orm\'eb }{\i\f1 means "wrath, haste, violence, rushing".

\par   }{\f1 SUMMON }{\b\f1 tulta- }{\f1 (send for, fetch), }{\b\f1 yal- }{\i\f1 (dative infinitive }{\b\i\f1 #yalien }{\i\f1 is attested in }{\b\i\f1 enyalien }{\i\f1 "for the re-calling"). -TUL, UT:317        
\par   }{\f1 SUN }{\b\f1 Anar}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 \'darin }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'darind-}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (the latter was a "name of the Sun"; in LT1:271 }{\b\i\f1 \'farin }{\i\f1 is glossed "blazing hot", and the word for "Sun" is }{\b\i\f1 \'dar }{\i\f1 ["}{\b\i\f1 \'dbr
}{\i\f1 "] or }{\b\i\f1 \'dari}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 \'darinci}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 Urwen}{\i\f1 .The stem }{\b\i\f1 \'darin}{\i\f1 
 is derived from was struck out in Etym. However, several words that must be derived from the same stem occur in LotR, indicating that Tolkien restored it.) }{\b\f1 Naira }{\i\f1 ("the heart of flame"), }{\b\f1 Calav\'e9n\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Calavent\'eb }
{\i\f1 (another names for the Sun). }{\f1 SUNLIGHT }{\b\f1 \'e1r\'eb }{\i\f1 (older [MET] }{\b\i\f1 \'e1z\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 ; SUNRISE }{\b\f1 anar\'f3r\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ambaron}{\f1 /}{\b\f1 Ambar\'f3n\'eb }{\f1 (uprising, Orient) }{\i\f1 
(a similar but untranslated word, }{\b\i\f1 Ambar\'f3na}{\i\f1 , occurs in LotR), }{\b\f1 r\'f3men }{\i\f1 (glossed "uprising, sunrise, east" in Silm:437, but the normal meaning of the word is always "east")}{\f1 . SUNSET }{\b\f1 and\'fan\'eb}{\f1 
 (west, evening), }{\b\f1 n\'faro}{\f1 .}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (}{\b\i\f1 Amunt\'eb }{\i\f1 in LT2 is certainly obsolete)}{\f1 ; RAY OF THE SUN }{\b\f1 firin }{\i\f1 (the latter may not be a valid word in LotR-style Quenya) -AN\'c1
R, UR, LotR:1157, LotR:254, ORO, AM, LotR:490, NDU, MR:198, Silm:428, LT2:335, 341
\par   }{\f1 SOUP }{\b\f1 sulpa }{\f1 -}{\i\f1 LT1:266
\par }{\b\f1   }{\f1 STUDY }{\i\f1 (long)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 n\'f3l\'eb}{\f1  (wisdom, lore, knowledge). }{\i\f1 (In Etym this word is spelt with initial }{\b\i\f1 \'f1}{\i\f1 , that is, }{\b\i\f1 ng}{\i\f1 . Initial }{\b\i\f1 ng }{\i\f1 had become }{\b\i\f1 n }{
\i\f1 in Third Age Quenya, and I follow the system of LotR and transcribe it accordingly. }{\b\i\f1 N\'f3l\'eb }{\i\f1 is so spelt also in Silm:432. But if this word is written in Tengwar, the initial }{\b\i\f1 n }{\i\f1 
should be transcribed with the letter }{\b\i\f1 noldo}{\i\f1 , not }{\b\i\f1 n\'famen}{\i\f1 .) -\'d1GOL, Silm:432
\par   }{\f1 SUP }{\b\f1 salpa- }{\i\f1 (so in Etym; "take a sup of" in LT1:266) }{\f1 (sip, lick up) }{\i\f1 -S\'c1LAP, LT1:266
\par   }{\f1 SUPPORT }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 tulto }{\f1 (prop) }{\i\f1 -TULUK
\par   }{\f1 SUPPOSE }{\b\f1 intya-}{\f1 ; SUPPOSITION }{\b\f1 intya }{\f1 (guess, idea) }{\i\f1 -INK
\par   }{\f1 SUPREME }{\i\f1 The Supreme }{\b\f1 Aratar }{\i\f1 (pl; sg #}{\b\i\f1 Arata}{\i\f1 ). The Aratar are the mightiest of the Valar: Manw\'eb, Varda, Ulmo, Yavanna, Aul\'eb, Mandos, Nienna, and Orom\'eb. }{\b\i\f1 Aratar }{\i\f1 
is also rendered "High Ones, Exalted Ones" -Silm 32/381, WJ:402 
\par   }{\f1 SURE }{\b\f1 tanca }{\f1 (firm, fixed) }{\i\f1 -TAK
\par   }{\f1 SURF }{\b\f1 solor}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 soloss\'eb }{\f1 (surge). LINE OF SURF }{\b\f1 falass\'eb }{\f1 (beach, shore)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -SOL, LT1:266, Silm:431
\par   }{\f1 SURFACE }{\b\f1 pal\'far\'eb }{\f1 (bosom, bosom of Earth - }{\i\f1 Tolkien equated }{\b\i\f1 pal\'far\'eb}{\i\f1  with the Old English word }{\f1 folde}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 palm\'eb }{\i\f1 -PAL
\par   }{\f1 SURGE }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 soloss\'eb }{\f1 (surf) }{\i\f1 -LT1:266
\par   }{\f1 SWALLOW }{\b\f1 tuilindo }{\i\f1 (lit. "spring-singer")}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 -TUY/LIN}{\i\f1\fs12 2}{\i\f1 /LT1:269/LT2:338}{\f1 
\par   SWAN }{\b\f1 alqua}{\f1 ; HAVEN OF THE SWANS }{\b\f1 Alqualond\'eb }{\i\f1 -\'c1LAK/Silm:427/LT1:249, LT2:335 (LT1:249 also has }{\b\i\f1 alqu\'eb}{\i\f1 ), UT:417
\par   }{\f1 SWARD }{\b\f1 palis }{\f1 (lawn) }{\i\f1 -LT1:264
\par   }{\f1 SWART }{\b\f1 varn\'eb }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 varni-}{\f1 ) (brown, dark brown) }{\i\f1 The form }{\b\i\f1 varni- }{\i\f1 is evidently used in compounds. -BAR\'c1N}{\f1 
\par   SWEET }{\b\f1 liss\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -Nam}{\f1 ,}{\i\f1  RGEO:66}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 SWELL }{\b\f1 tiuya- }{\f1 (grow fat) }{\i\f1 -TIW
\par   }{\f1 SWIFT }{\b\f1 #linta }{\i\f1 (only pl }{\b\i\f1 lint\'eb }{\i\f1 is attested)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tyelca }{\f1 (agile, hasty), }{\b\f1 larca}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 alarca }{\f1 (rapid), }{\b\f1 arauca }{\f1 (rushing) }{\i\f1 -Nam, KYELEK, LAK, LT2:347
\par   }{\f1 SWIRL }{\b\f1 hwinya- }{\f1 (eddy, gyrate) }{\i\f1 -SWIN}{\f1 
\par   SWORD }{\b\f1 macil}{\f1 ; BROAD SWORD }{\b\f1 lango}{\f1  (}{\i\f1 also = }{\f1 prow of a ship), LARGE SWORD }{\b\f1 falquan}{\f1 ; SHORT STABBING SWORD, BROAD-BLADED SWORD }{\b\f1 ecet}{\f1 , SWORD BLADE }{\b\f1 maica}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
(also blade of any cutting tool or weapon, but esp. sword-blade)}{\f1 , \'86}{\b\f1 russ\'eb }{\f1 (corruscation), SWORDSMAN }{\b\f1 macar}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 -MAK/LT1:259/VT39:11, LAG, LT2:341, UT:284/432, VT39:11, RUS, VT39:11
\par   }{\f1 SWORN BROTHER }{\b\f1 otorno }{\f1 (associate) }{\i\f1 -TOR
\par   }{\f1 SYRUP }{\b\f1 pirya- }{\f1 (juice) }{\i\f1 -PIS
\par  
\par }{\b\f1\fs24   <T>
\par }{\f1   TALE }{\b\f1 ny\'e1r\'eb }{\f1 (saga, history), }{\b\f1 nyarna }{\f1 (saga) }{\i\f1 -NAR}{\i\f1\fs12 2
\par   }{\i\f1  }{\f1 TALK }{\b\f1 quet- }{\f1 (pa.t. }{\b\f1 quent\'eb}{\f1 ) (say, speak) }{\i\f1 -LT2:348}{\f1 
\par   TALL }{\b\f1 halla}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tunda }{\i\f1 (Note: the latter has a homophone meaning "kindle")}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 t\'e1ra }{\f1 (high)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -LotR:1157, TUN, WJ:417
\par   }{\f1 TANGLE }{\b\f1 fasta- }{\i\f1 -PHAS
\par   }{\f1 TAP }{\b\f1 tamin }{\i\f1 ("I tap", 1st pers. aorist)}{\f1  (pa.t. }{\b\f1 tamn\'eb}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 -TAM
\par   }{\f1 TAPER }{\b\f1 l\'edcuma }{\f1 (candle) }{\i\f1 -MC:223
\par   }{\f1 TARN }{\b\f1 moil\'eb }{\i\f1 -LT2:349
\par }{\f1   TASSEL }{\b\f1 fas}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 fats\'eb}{\i\f1  -GL:34
\par   }{\f1 TASTE }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 tyavin }{\i\f1 ("I taste", 1st pers. aorist)}{\f1 ; TASTE }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 ty\'e1v\'eb}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 ty\'e1ver }{\i\f1 is attested in the compound }{\b\i\f1 l\'e1maty\'e1ver }{\i\f1 
"sound-tastes"; see SOUND-TASTE.) -KYAB, MR:215
\par   }{\f1 TAUT }{\b\f1 tunga }{\f1 (tight, [of strings:] resonant) }{\i\f1 -TUG
\par   }{\f1 TEAR }{\b\f1 n\'edr\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ni\'eb }{\i\f1 -NEI, LT1:262}{\f1 
\par   TELEPATHY see THOUGHT
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 TELL }{\b\f1 nyarin }{\i\f1 ("I tell", 1st pers. aorist) }{\f1 (relate); NOT TO BE TOLD OR RELATED }{\b\f1 avany\'e1rima}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -NAR}{\i\f1\fs12 2}{\i\f1 , WJ:370
\par   }{\f1 TEMPLE }{\b\f1 corda }{\i\f1 -LT1:257}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 TEN }{\b\f1 cainen }{\i\f1 -KAYAN, KAYAR   
\par   }{\f1 TENDRIL }{\b\f1 liant\'eb }{\i\f1 (but in Etym, this word is glossed "spider", q.v.) -LT1:271
\par   }{\f1 TERRIBLE }{\b\f1 r\'facima}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 aica}{\f1  (fell, dire, sharp); VERY TERRIBLE CREATURE }{\b\f1 rauco }{\i\f1 -WJ:415, PM:347, VT39:10
\par   }{\f1 TERRIFY }{\b\f1 ruhta- }{\i\f1 -WJ:415
\par   }{\f1 TERROR }{\b\f1 oss\'eb }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 Oss\'eb }{\f1 is also the name of a Maia held to be responsible for storms at sea.) }{\i\f1 -GOS, Silm:33, 34
\par   }{\f1 THANKSGIVING }{\b\f1 #hantal\'eb }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 Eruhantal\'eb }{\i\f1 "thanksgiving to Eru". A verbal stem #}{\b\i\f1 hanta- }{\i\f1 "thank" can also be isolated.) -UT:436 
\par   }{\f1 THAT }{\b\f1 ta }{\f1 (it), }{\b\f1 tana}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 yana }{\f1 (the former), THAT }{\i\f1 (relative pronoun): "who, which, that" as a relative pronoun is }{\b\i\f1 i }{\i\f1 or }{\b\i\f1 ya}{\i\f1 : }{\b\i\f1 i Eru i or ily\'eb mahalmar \'eba 
}{\i\f1 "the One who is above all thrones", }{\b\i\f1 i carir quettar \'f3mainen }{\i\f1 "those who form words with voices"}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 A pronoun }{\b\i\f1 ya }{\i\f1 *"which" is found in the "Arctic" sentence; }{\b\i\f1 yassen }{\i\f1 
"in which" in Nam is evidently this pronoun + a plural locative ending. -TA, YA, WJ:391, UT:305, 317, Arct
\par   }{\f1 THATCH }{\b\f1 tups\'eb }{\i\f1 -TUP
\par   }{\f1 THE }{\b\f1 i }{\i\f1 In Quenya, the definite article is generally used as in English. However, notice that it is not used before plural words denoting an entire people or race, such as }{\b\i\f1 Valar}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 Quendi}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 
Noldor}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 Sindar}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 Eldar}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 Ainur}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 F\'edrimar}{\i\f1  etc. This is evident from examples like }{\b\i\f1 lamb\'eb Eldaron }{\i\f1 "the language of the Eldar [lit. simply "Eldar"]", }{
\b\i\f1 Valar valuvar }{\i\f1 "the will of the Valar [lit. simply "Valar"] will be done". Cf. Tolkien's use of "Men" with no article, meaning the entire human race or humans in general, while "the Men" would be a group of individuals. }{\b\i\f1 Anar }{
\i\f1 "the Sun" and }{\b\i\f1 Isil }{\i\f1 "the Moon" are probably treated like proper names in Quenya; they do not take the article. When a noun is determined by a following genitive, it is evidently optional whether it takes the article or not: }{
\b\i\f1 mannar Valion }{\i\f1 "into the hands [lit. simply "hands"] of the Lords",}{\b\i\f1  Indis i Ciryamo }{\i\f1 "The Mariner's Wife, *The Wife [lit. simply "Wife"] of the Mariner" - but contrast }{\b\i\f1 I Equessi R\'familo }{\i\f1 "the Sayings of R
\'famil", }{\b\i\f1 i arani Eldaron }{\i\f1 "the Kings of the Eldar". If the genitive precedes the noun, the article must probably be left out in all cases, as in English (*}{\b\i\f1 Eldaron arani}{\i\f1 ,}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 ?}{\b\i\f1 Eldaron i arani}{
\i\f1 ). Note: }{\b\i\f1 i }{\i\f1 is also the relative pronoun "who, that"; see WHO. -I, WJ:404, 368, FS, UT:8,  WJ:398, 369     
\par   }{\f1 THEE }{\b\f1 le }{\i\f1 (formal, perhaps the object form of }{\b\i\f1 ely\'eb}{\i\f1  "thou", q.v; only known as a borrowing in Sindarin; see the notes on the poem }{\b\i\f1 A Elbereth Gilthoniel}{\i\f1  in RGEO); }{\b\f1 tye }{\i\f1 
(familiar or intimate). -LotR:61
\par   }{\f1 THEIR - }{\i\f1 if analogy can be trusted, "their" is the ending *}{\b\i\f1 -nta}{\i\f1 , e.g. *}{\b\i\f1 aldanta }{\i\f1 "their tree". See THEY.
\par   }{\f1 THEM }{\b\f1 te }{\i\f1 (independent pronoun)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 -t }{\i\f1 (pronominal ending, e.g. }{\b\i\f1 laituvalmet}{\i\f1 , "WE [-}{\b\i\f1 lme}{\i\f1 -] will praise THEM [-}{\b\i\f1 t}{\i\f1 ]") -LotR:989 cf. Letters:308 
\par   }{\f1 THEN }{\b\f1 san }{\i\f1 -MC:216}{\f1 
\par   THERE, LOOK! }{\b\f1 en }{\f1 (yonder) }{\i\f1 -EN
\par   }{\f1 THEY -}{\b\f1 nt\'eb }{\i\f1 (pronominal ending): }{\b\i\f1 Tiruvantes i h\'e1rar mahalmassen m\'ed N\'famen }{\i\f1 "they will keep it who sit upon thrones in the West". The independent, emphatic form may be *}{\b\i\f1 ent\'eb}{\i\f1 
.) Object "them" (and non-emphatic "they") is the independent pronoun }{\b\i\f1 te}{\i\f1 , that may also be expressed by the pronominal ending }{\b\i\f1 -t }{\i\f1 (as in }{\b\i\f1 a laita, laita te}{\i\f1 ...}{\b\i\f1 laituvalmet}{\i\f1 
, "bless them, bless them...we shall bless [or praise] them"). For "they", there is also the ending }{\b\f1 -}{\b\i\f1 lto}{\i\f1  as in }{\b\i\f1 tulielto}{\i\f1 
 "they have come" (LT1:270), but its status in LotR-style Quenya is uncertain. -UT:317, LotR:989 cf Letters:308
\par   }{\f1 THICK }{\b\f1 tiuca }{\f1 (fat) }{\i\f1 -TIW
\par   }{\f1 THIGH }{\b\f1 tiuco }{\f1 -}{\i\f1 TIW
\par   }{\f1 THIN - }{\i\f1 long and thin: }{\b\f1 lenwa }{\f1 (straight, narrow) }{\i\f1 -LT2:341
\par   }{\f1 THING }{\b\f1 nat}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 engw\'eb}{\f1 ; THING MADE }{\b\f1 tanw\'eb }{\f1 (device, construction, craft) }{\i\f1 -N\'c2}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 , VT39:7, TAN
\par   }{\f1 THINGOL }{\b\f1 Singollo}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 short for}{\f1  }{\b\f1 Sindacollo }{\i\f1 (so in Silm:421; MR:217}{\f1  }{\i\f1 and WJ:410 have }{\b\i\f1 Sindicollo}{\i\f1 , where the }{\b\i\f1 s }{\i\f1 represents original }{\b\i\f1 th}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 
cf. PM:337, where the spelling }{\b\i\f1 \'deindikollo}{\i\f1  is used [\'de = }{\f1 th }{\i\f1 as in }{\f1 thin}{\i\f1 ]. Hence, these variant forms should be spelt with in initial }{\b\i\f1 s\'fal\'eb}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 not }{\b\i\f1 silm\'eb}{\i\f1 
, in Tengwar writing). However, it appears that Thingol was usually called }{\b\i\f1 Elw\'eb }{\i\f1 in Quenya.}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -MR:385
\par   }{\f1 THIRD }{\b\f1 #nelya }{\i\f1 (cf. }{\b\i\f1 Nelyar }{\i\f1 "Thirds", the third clan among the Elves) -WJ:420
\par   }{\f1 THIRSTY }{\b\f1 soica}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 fauca }{\f1 (open-mouthed, parched) }{\i\f1 -PHAU, VT39:11
\par   }{\f1 THIS }{\b\f1 sina}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -UT:305
\par   }{\f1 THITHER }{\b\f1 tar}{\f1 ; THITHER LANDS }{\i\f1 (as seen from Valinor)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 Entar}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Entarda }{\f1 (Outer Lands, Middle-earth, East) }{\i\f1 -TA, EN
\par   }{\f1 THORN }{\b\f1 nass\'eb }{\f1 (spike) }{\i\f1 -NAS
\par   }{\f1 THORONDOR }{\b\f1 Sorontar }{\i\f1 -Silm:438
\par   }{\f1 THOU }{\b\f1 ely\'eb }{\i\f1 (independent pronoun, used for emphasis, therefore translated "even thou" in Nam and RGEO:67)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 -ly\'eb }{\i\f1 (pronominal ending; the normal way of expressing non-emphatic "thou": }{\b\i\f1 hiruvaly\'eb 
}{\i\f1 "thou shalt find"). This "thou" is formal. Concerning familiar or intimate "thou", that would often be translated "you" in English, only the object }{\b\i\f1 tye }{\i\f1 "thee" [q.v.] and the short suffix }{\b\i\f1 -t }{\i\f1 
is attested; the latter may be used on imperatives, e.g. }{\b\i\f1 hecat }{\i\f1 "get thee gone!") -Nam/RGEO:67, WJ:364
\par  }{\f1  THOUGHT }{\b\f1 sanw\'eb}{\f1 ; COMMUNICATION OF THOUGHT, INTERCHANGE OF THOUGHT }{\i\f1 (= telepathy)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 \'f3sanw\'eb}{\f1 ; THOUGHT-OPENING }{\b\f1 sanw\'eb-latya}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (direct, telepathic thought-transfer)}{\f1 
; THOUGHT-SENDING }{\b\f1 sanwe-menta}{\f1  (mental message) }{\i\f1 -VT39:23, 30, MR:415, VT41:5
\par   }{\f1 THRALL }{\b\f1 m\'f3l }{\i\f1 -M\'d4
\par   }{\f1 THREAD }{\i\f1 (fine) }{\b\f1 lia }{\f1 (spider filament. }{\i\f1 Note: }{\b\i\f1 lia- }{\i\f1 is also the verb "twine".}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 -SLIG
\par   }{\f1 THREE }{\b\f1 neld\'eb }{\i\f1 (obsoleting }{\b\i\f1 ol\'eb }{\i\f1 in LT1:258) -NEL
\par   }{\f1 THRESHOLD }{\b\f1 fenda }{\i\f1 -PHEN                                
\par   }{\f1 THROAT }{\b\f1 lanco }{\i\f1 -LAK, LANK
\par   }{\f1 THRONE }{\b\f1 mahalma }{\i\f1 (loc. pl. }{\b\i\f1 mahalmassen }{\i\f1 is attested) -UT:317
\par }{\f1   THRONG }{\b\f1 sanga }{\f1 (crowd, press); THRONG-CLEAVER }{\b\f1 Sangahyando }{\i\f1 (personal name, the "throng" being a closely formed body of enemy soldiers)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -STAG, LT2:342, LotR:1085 cf. Letters:425
\par   }{\f1 THROUGH }{\b\f1 ter\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ter}{\f1 ; "THROUGH-ABIDE" }{\i\f1 (i.e., stand [fast]) #}{\b\f1 termar}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (only fut. }{\b\i\f1 termaruva }{\i\f1 is attested)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -TER, UT:305, 317
\par   }{\f1 THY }{\b\f1 -lya}{\f1 , *}{\b\f1 -tya }{\i\f1 (endings used on nouns, e.g. *}{\b\i\f1 aldalya}{\i\f1 , *}{\b\i\f1 aldatya }{\i\f1 "thy tree". The ending *}{\b\i\f1 -tya }{\i\f1 
is not attested and is deduced from the pronoun "thee" [q.v.].) The semantic distinction between }{\b\i\f1 -lya }{\i\f1 and }{\b\i\f1 *-tya }{\i\f1 is that }{\b\i\f1 -lya }{\i\f1 is formal or polite, while *}{\b\i\f1 -tya }{\i\f1 
is intimate or familiar. Cf. THEE. In UT:51 (cf. 22), }{\b\i\f1 -lya }{\i\f1 is translated "your" instead of "thy", following modern English usage (}{\b\i\f1 tielyanna }{\i\f1 "upon your path").}{\f1 
\par   TIE }{\b\f1 nut}{\f1 - (1st person aorst }{\b\f1 nutin}{\f1  "I tie") }{\i\f1 -NUT
\par   }{\f1 TIGHT }{\b\f1 tunga }{\f1 (taut, [of strings:] resonant) }{\i\f1 -TUG
\par   }{\f1 TILL }{\b\f1 an }{\f1 (for, to) }{\i\f1 -Arct
\par   }{\f1 TILTED }{\b\f1 talta- }{\f1 (sloping, leaning) }{\i\f1 -TAL\'c1T
\par   }{\f1 TIME }{\b\f1 l\'fam\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (translated "hour" in LotR:94; allative }{\b\i\f1 l\'famenna }{\i\f1 is attested. Note: }{\b\i\f1 l\'fam\'eb }{\i\f1 also means "darkness")}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 l\'fa }{\i\f1 (= "a time, occasion").}{\f1 
 FIXED TIME }{\b\f1 asar }{\f1 (Vanyarin }{\b\f1 athar}{\f1 ) (festival); pl. }{\b\f1 asari}{\f1  is attested.}{\i\f1  }{\f1 ONCE UPON A TIME  }{\b\f1 yass\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 yal\'famess\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 y\'e1ress\'eb }{\i\f1 
(Note: the first of these seems to clash with }{\b\i\f1 *yass\'eb }{\i\f1 "in/on which".) -LU, WJ:399/VT39:31, YA
\par   }{\f1 TIMID }{\b\f1 caur\'eba }{\i\f1 -LT1:257}{\b\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 TIN }{\b\f1 lat\'facen}{\f1 ; OF TIN }{\b\f1 latucenda }{\i\f1 -LT1:268
\par }{\b\f1   }{\f1 TINDER }{\b\f1 tustur\'eb }{\i\f1 -LT1:270
\par   }{\f1 TINFANG }{\b\f1 Timpando }{\i\f1 -LT1:268}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 TINY }{\b\f1 titta }{\f1 (little) }{\i\f1 -TIT       
\par   }{\f1 TISSUE }{\b\f1 lann\'eb }{\f1 (cloth)}{\i\f1  -LAN
\par   }{\f1 TITLE }{\i\f1 see NICKNAME.
\par   }{\f1 TO, TOWARDS }{\b\f1 ana}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 na}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 an }{\f1 (for, till); }{\i\f1 (prefix:) }{\b\f1 ana-}{\f1 .}{\i\f1  English "to, towards, -wards" will often be rendered by the allative ending }{\b\i\f1 -nna}{\i\f1 , pl -}{\b\i\f1 nnar}{
\i\f1 , as in }{\b\i\f1 Elenna }{\i\f1 "Starwards" (}{\b\i\f1 Elen }{\i\f1 + [}{\b\i\f1 n}{\i\f1 ]}{\b\i\f1 na}{\i\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -N\'c2, Plotz letter, UT:432, Silm:313
\par   }{\f1 TOGETHER }{\b\f1 o- }{\f1 (prefix) }{\i\f1 -W\'d4
\par   }{\f1 TOIL }{\b\f1 m\'f3ta- }{\f1 (labour) }{\i\f1 -M\'d4}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 TOKEN }{\b\f1 tengw\'eb }{\f1 (indication, sign, writing - }{\i\f1 pl }{\b\i\f1 tengwi }{\i\f1 is attested}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 -WJ:394, 395 cf. TEK   
\par   }{\f1 TOMB }{\b\f1 #noir\'eb }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 Noirinan}{\i\f1 , "Valley of the Tombs") -UT:166
\par  }{\f1 -TON }{\i\f1 (reduced form of "town" in names) }{\b\f1 -mas }{\f1 (-by) }{\i\f1 -LT1:251}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1  
\par   }{\f1 TONGUE }{\i\f1 (physical tongue:) }{\b\f1 lamba}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 (language:)}{\b\i\f1  }{\b\f1 lamb\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 quetil}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (In LT2:339, it is said that }{\b\i\f1 lamb\'eb }{\i\f1 
covers both "physical tongue" and "speech", but Tolkien later thought better of that. WJ:394 states that in non-technical use, }{\b\i\f1 lamb\'eb }{\i\f1 was the normal word for "language"; only the Loremasters used the technical term }{\b\i\f1 tengwesta 
}{\i\f1 instead.) }{\f1 LOREMASTER OF TONGUES #}{\b\f1 Lambengolmo }{\i\f1 (only pl }{\b\i\f1 Lambengolmor }{\i\f1 is attested) -LAB/LotR:1157/WJ:394, 396, KWET}{\f1 
\par   TOO (= excessively, as in "too big") }{\b\f1 acca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  -}{\i\f1 PE13:108
\par   }{\f1 TOOTH }{\b\f1 nelet }{\f1 (pl }{\b\f1 nelci}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 carca }{\f1 (fang, tusk); ROW OF TEETH }{\b\f1 carcan\'eb }{\i\f1 (LT2 has }{\b\i\f1 carcass\'eb}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 carcaras }{\i\f1 "row of spikes or teeth".) -N\'c9L-EK, KARAK/LT2:344

\par   }{\f1 TOPMOST PINNACLE }{\i\f1 see FINISH.
\par   }{\f1 TORMENT }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 nwalya-}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (Though spelt this way also in Etym, }{\b\i\f1 nwalya- }{\i\f1 must be from older *}{\b\i\f1 ngwalya}{\i\f1 , for the stem is }{\b\i\f1 \'d1GWAL}{\i\f1 . In Tengwar spelling, the letter }{
\b\i\f1 nwalm\'eb }{\i\f1 (< older }{\b\i\f1 ngwalm\'eb}{\i\f1 ) should be used to transcribe the initial }{\b\i\f1 nw }{\i\f1 of }{\b\i\f1 nwalya}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 )}{\f1  TORMENT }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 nwalm\'eb }{\i\f1 (older [MET] }{\b\i\f1 ngwalm\'eb}{
\i\f1 ), }{\b\f1 angaitya}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -LotR:1157 cf. \'d1GWAL; LT1:249}{\b\f1  
\par   }{\f1 TORTURE }{\b\f1 ungwal\'eb}{\f1 ; }{\i\f1 ("Qenya" also:)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 malcan\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 valcan\'eb }{\i\f1 -\'d1GWAL, LT1:250
\par   }{\f1 TOUGH }{\b\f1 norna }{\f1 (stiff), }{\b\f1 tarya }{\f1 (stiff) }{\i\f1 -WJ:413, T\'c1RAG
\par   }{\f1 TOWARDS }{\b\f1 ana}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 na}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 an }{\f1 (for); }{\i\f1 (prefix:) }{\b\f1 ana- }{\f1 (to) }{\i\f1 -N\'c2
\par   }{\f1 TOWER }{\b\f1 mindon }{\i\f1 (also translated "Lofty Tower"; allative pl }{\b\i\f1 mindonnar }{\i\f1 or }{\b\i\f1 mindoninnar }{\i\f1 is attested) }{\f1 (turret),}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 mindo }{\i\f1 (=isolated tower)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tirion }{\i\f1 
(= watchtower; also defined as "a mighty tower, a city on a hill)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tirin }{\i\f1 (= tall tower; Note: a homophone means "I watch") See also TOWN WITH WALLS AND TOWERS. -LT2:346/MC:222, MINI, LT1:258, TIR
\par   }{\f1 TOWN }{\b\f1 osto }{\i\f1 (= town with wall) }{\f1 (city), }{\b\f1 opel\'eb}{\f1  (walled village/house), }{\b\f1 irin}{\f1 ; TOWN WITH WALLS AND TOWERS }{\b\f1 tirios}{\f1 , TOWNSHIP }{\b\f1 ostar  }{\i\f1 -OS, PEL(ES), LT1:258, LT2:343, 336

\par   }{\f1 TRADE }{\i\f1 (vb)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 manca-}{\f1 , TRADESMAN }{\b\f1 macar }{\i\f1 -MBAKH}{\b\f1  
\par   }{\f1 TRAILING }{\b\f1 s\'f3ra }{\f1 (long) }{\i\f1 -LT2:344
\par   }{\f1 TRANSPARENCE }{\b\f1 liquis}{\f1 , TRANSPARENCY }{\b\f1 - }{\i\f1 the word }{\b\i\f1 v\'edrin }{\i\f1 is defined as "a magic glassy substance of great lucency used in fashoning the Moon. Used of th
ings of great and pure transparency." -LT1:262, LT2:339 }{\b\f1  
\par   }{\f1 TRAVEL }{\b\f1 lelya- }{\f1 (pa.t. }{\b\f1 lend\'eb}{\f1 ) (go, proceed) }{\i\f1 -WJ:363}{\b\f1 
\par   }{\f1 TREASURE }{\b\f1 harma}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 harw\'eb }{\i\f1 (both words also used of a single treasured thing)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 foa}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 m\'edr\'eb}{\f1  (jewel, precious thing); TREASURY }{\b\f1 harw\'eb }{\i\f1 (also used = treasure)}{\f1 . }
{\i\f1 -3AR/LotR:1157, LT2:340, MIR
\par   }{\f1 TREE }{\b\f1 alda }{\i\f1 (gen.pl. }{\b\i\f1 aldaron }{\i\f1 is attested)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 orn\'eb }{\i\f1 (= high, isolated tree)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 taul\'eb }{\i\f1 (= great tree)}{\f1 . HAVING TREES, TREE-GROWN }{\b\f1 aldarwa}{\f1 , TREE-SHADOWED }{
\b\f1 ald\'eba}{\f1 , AVENUE OF TREES }{\b\f1 ald\'ebon}{\f1 ; LORD OF TREES }{\b\f1 Aldaron }{\i\f1 (a name of Orom\'eb) }{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -GALAD/Nam/LotR:1147/1157/VT39:7, OR-NI/LotR:488 cf. Letters:308, LT1:267, LT1:249, Silm:32, 378 
\par   }{\f1 TRESS }{\b\f1 find\'eb }{\f1 (lock of hair) }{\i\f1 (probably obsoleting }{\b\i\f1 findil }{\i\f1 in LT2) -SPIN, LT2:341
\par   }{\f1 TRIANGLE }{\b\f1 neltil }{\f1 (pl }{\b\f1 neltildi}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 nasta }{\f1 (spear-head, point, gore) }{\i\f1 -TIL, SNAS
\par   }{\f1 TRIBE }{\b\f1 hostar }{\i\f1 -LT2:340
\par   }{\f1 TROOP }{\b\f1 hoss\'eb }{\f1 (army, band) }{\i\f1 -LT2:340
\par   }{\f1 TROTH }{\b\f1 v\'e9r\'eb }{\f1 (bond, compact, oath) }{\i\f1 (Pl. probably *}{\b\i\f1 v\'e9rer}{\i\f1  not }{\b\i\f1 *v\'e9ri}{\i\f1 ; cf. the similar formation }{\b\i\f1 ty\'e1v\'eb }{\i\f1 "taste", pl }{\b\i\f1 ty\'e1ver}{\i\f1 .) -WED
\par   }{\f1 TRUE }{\b\f1 sanda }{\f1 (firm, abiding), }{\b\f1 anwa }{\f1 (real, actual) }{\i\f1 -STAN, ANA
\par   }{\f1 TRUMP }{\b\f1 hy\'f3la -}{\i\f1 SD:419}{\f1 
\par   TRUMPET }{\b\f1 romba}{\f1  (horn), }{\b\f1 tumb\'eb}{\f1 ; TRUMPET-SOUND }{\b\f1 r\'f3ma}{\f1  (loud sound) }{\i\f1 (Note: }{\b\i\f1 r\'f3ma }{\i\f1 means "shoulder" in one of Tolkien's early "Qenya" lexicons.) -WJ:400/ROM, LT1:269
\par   }{\f1 TRUST }{\b\f1 estel }{\f1 (hope) -}{\i\f1 MR:320
\par }{\f1   }{\i\f1 T}{\f1 -SERIES }{\b\f1 tincot\'e9ma }{\f1 (dental series) }{\i\f1 -LotR:1154}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 TUBE }{\b\f1 r\'f3ta }{\f1 -}{\i\f1 LT2:347
\par   }{\f1 T\'daN }{\i\f1 (Old English) }{\f1 see FENCED FIELD }{\i\f1 -PEL(ES)}{\f1 
\par   TUNE }{\b\f1 lind\'eb }{\f1 (air, song, singing)}{\i\f1  -LIN}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1  
\par }{\f1   TUNNEL }{\b\f1 rotto}{\f1  (small grot) }{\i\f1 -PM:365
\par   }{\f1 TURGON }{\b\f1 Turuc\'e1no}{\f1  (so in PM:345, obsoleting }{\b\f1 Turondo}{\f1  in LT1:115)
\par   TURRET }{\b\f1 mindon }{\f1 (tower) }{\i\f1 -LT1:260
\par   }{\f1 TUSK }{\b\f1 carca }{\f1 (tooth, fang) }{\i\f1 -Silm:429, LT2:344  
\par   }{\f1 TWANG }{\b\f1 ting\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tango}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 LT1:256 has }{\b\i\f1 quingi- }{\i\f1 "twang, of strings, harp".}{\f1  }{\i\f1 In Etym, there is also the unglossed verb }{\b\i\f1 tanga}{\i\f1 -  = *"make a twang"??? -TING, TANG      }{
\f1 
\par   TWELVE }{\b\f1 *rasta }{\i\f1 (only the stem R\'c1SAT is given; assuming that the actual primitive word was *}{\f1 r\'e1sat\'e2}{\i\f1  and that the sound-changes were regular, this would become }{\b\i\f1 *rasta}{\i\f1  in Quenya).}{\f1  TWELVE HOURS }{
\i\f1 ("day" not meaning 24 hours) }{\b\f1 arya }{\f1 (day) }{\i\f1 -R\'c1SAT, AR}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1\fs12 
\par     }{\f1 TWILIGHT }{\b\f1 tind\'f3m\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (usually of the time near dawn, glossed "starry twilight" in Silm:438),}{\f1  }{\b\f1 und\'f3m\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (= evening twilight), }{\b\f1 y\'facal\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 yual\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 l\'f3
m\'eb }{\f1 (night, dusk, gloom, darkness. }{\i\f1 Cf. }{\b\i\f1 L\'f3mion }{\i\f1 "Child of the Twilight".}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -LotR 1145, KAL, LT1:255, Silm:160
\par   }{\f1 TWIN }{\b\f1 on\'f3na}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 (also = adj "twinborn", the primary meaning of the word), }{\f1 pl. }{\b\f1 \'f3noni }{\i\f1 (surprisingly, a dual form is not used) -WJ:367
\par   }{\f1 TWINE }{\b\f1 lia- }{\i\f1 (Note: }{\b\i\f1 lia }{\i\f1 is also a noun meaning "fine thread, spider's filament) -LT1:271
\par   }{\f1 TWINKLE #}{\b\f1 tintila- }{\i\f1 (only pl }{\b\i\f1 tintilar }{\i\f1 is attested) -Nam, RGEO:67}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 
\par   }{\f1 TWINKLING STAR }{\b\f1 tingilya}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tingilind\'eb }{\i\f1 -TIN}{\f1 
\par   TWIST #}{\b\f1 ric}{\f1 - (only the perfect }{\b\f1 ir\'edci\'eb}{\f1  "has twisted" is attested) }{\i\f1 (VT39:9)}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 TWISTED }{\b\f1 nauca }{\f1 (hard, ill-shapen, *small }{\i\f1 - see SMALL}{\f1 .) }{\i\f1 -WJ:413
\par   }{\f1 TWITCH }{\b\f1 rihta- }{\f1 (jerk, give quick twist or move) }{\i\f1 -RIK(H) 
\par   }{\f1 TWO }{\b\f1 atta }{\i\f1 -AT(AT)/Letters:427
\par }{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1\fs24   <U>}{\f1 
\par   UD\'dbN }{\b\f1 Utumno }{\i\f1 -Silm:438}{\f1 
\par   UGLY }{\b\f1 \'favanima}{\f1  (not fair). See also WITHOUT BEAUTY. }{\i\f1 -VT39:14}{\f1 
\par   ULTIMATE }{\b\f1 m\'e9tima }{\f1 (final, last) }{\i\f1 -MC:222 cf. 215
\par   }{\f1 UN- }{\i\f1 (prefix denying presence or possession of thing or quality) }{\b\f1 \'fa- }{\f1 (no-, not, un-, in-) }{\i\f1 (according to LR:396 s.v. UGU, this prefix usually has a "bad sense", cf. }{\b\i\f1 vanimor}{\i\f1  "fair folk" vs. }{\b\i\f1 
\'favanimor}{\i\f1  "monsters")}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 il- }{\i\f1 (denoting "the opposite, the reversal, i.e., more than the mere negation") -VT39:14, UGU, UMU, LT1:255}{\f1 
\par  *UNCOUNTABLE }{\b\f1 \'fan\'f3tima}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 \'fan\'f3tim\'eb }{\i\f1 is attested). }{\f1 Translated "numberless"; the interlinear translation in RGEO:66 has "not-count-able", while VT39:14 offers the translation "countless".}{\i\f1 
 -Nam}{\f1 
\par   UNCOUNTED }{\b\f1 unot\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 unot\'eba}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (read *}{\b\i\f1 \'fanot\'eb}{\i\f1 , *}{\b\i\f1 \'fanot\'eba}{\i\f1 ?)}{\f1  (not counted) }{\i\f1 -VT39:14}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 UNDER }{\b\f1 undu}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 nu }{\i\f1 (so in Nam; Etym has }{\b\i\f1 no}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 ; UNDERNEATH }{\b\f1 n\'fan}{\f1  (down below) }{\i\f1 -UNU, N\'db
\par   }{\f1 UNDERSTAND }{\b\f1 hanya}{\f1 - (know about, be skilled in dealing with); UNDERSTANDING }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 hand\'eb}{\f1  (knowledge); UNDERSTANDING }{\i\f1 (adjectival) }{\b\f1 handa }{\f1 (intelligent) }{\i\f1 -KHAN
\par   }{\f1 UNFURL }{\b\f1 panta}{\f1 - (spread out, open) }{\i\f1 -PAT
\par   }{\f1 UNIVERSE }{\b\f1 ilu}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 il\'fav\'eb }{\f1 (the whole, the all, Allness). The term }{\b\f1 ilu }{\f1 used of the universe includes God and all souls and spirits, that are not properly included in the term }{\b\f1 E\'e4}{\f1 .}{\b\f1  }{
\i\f1 -ILU (see IL), VT39:20}{\f1 
\par   UNWILL }{\b\f1 avanir}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (VT39:23)}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 UNPRONOUNCEABLE }{\b\f1 \'faqu\'e9tima }{\f1 (impossible to say/put into words, unspeakable) }{\i\f1 -WJ:370
\par   }{\f1 UNSPEAKABLE }{\b\f1 \'faqu\'e9tima }{\f1 (impossible to say/put into words, unpronounceable) }{\i\f1 -WJ:370}{\f1 
\par   UNWISE }{\b\f1 alasaila}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -VT41:13, 18
\par   }{\f1 UP, UPWARDS }{\b\f1 amba}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ama}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (prefix:) }{\b\f1 am-}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (The form }{\b\i\f1 amu }{\i\f1 in LT2:335 is prob. obsolete.) 
\par }{\f1 UPWARD SLOPE }{\b\f1 amban}{\f1 ; UPHILL }{\i\f1 (adj)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 ambapenda}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ampenda }{\f1  }{\i\f1 - AM}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 , UNU
\par   }{\f1 UPON }{\i\f1 - this English preposition may be rendered by the allative case, endings }{\b\i\f1 -nna}{\i\f1  pl. }{\b\i\f1 -nnar}{\i\f1 , dual }{\b\i\f1 -nta}{\i\f1 . Cf. }{\b\i\f1 falmalinnar }{\i\f1 "upon foaming waves", }{\b\i\f1 tielyanna }{
\i\f1 "upon your path". -Nam, UT:22 cf. 51
\par   }{\f1 UPPER AIRS AND CLOUDS }{\b\f1 fanyar\'eb }{\f1 (skies) }{\i\f1 -MC:223
\par   }{\f1 UPRISING }{\b\f1 ambaron}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Ambar\'f3n\'eb }{\f1 (sunrise, Orient) }{\i\f1 (a similar but untranslated word, }{\b\i\f1 Ambar\'f3na}{\i\f1 , occurs in LotR:490)}{\f1 . }{\b\i\f1 R\'f3men }{\i\f1 
is glossed "uprising, sunrise, east" in Silm:437, but the normal meaning of the word is always "east". Cf. also: }{\f1 "UPRISING-FLOWER" *}{\b\f1 ambalots\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("referring to the flower or floreate device used 
as a crest fixed to [the] point of a tall [illegible word, possibly 'archaic'] helmet", "pointed helm-crest". Tolkien asterisked the word because it was not attested, only a possible Quenya form of the name }{\b\i\f1 Amloth}{\i\f1 ) -AM}{\i\f1\super 2}{
\i\f1 , LotR:490, WJ:318
\par   }{\f1 URANUS }{\b\f1 Luinil }{\i\f1 (or less probably }{\b\i\f1 N\'e9nar}{\i\f1 ; it is not known for certain which of the two is Uranus and which is Neptune) -Basic Quenya:24, cf. Silm:55 
\par   }{\f1 URGE }{\b\f1 horta}{\f1 - (speed, send flying); URGING }{\i\f1 (noun, not adjectival participle)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 hortal\'eb}{\f1  (speeding), URGENCY }{\b\f1 horm\'eb }{\i\f1 -KHOR
\par   }{\f1 US }{\b\f1 me }{\i\f1 (attested with a dual ending: }{\b\i\f1 met }{\i\f1 "us two" in an exclusive sense, "he/she and me", evidently connecting with the ending -}{\b\i\f1 mm\'eb}{\i\f1 
, see WE). It is uncertain what inclusive "us" (i.e. "you and me") might be. Evidently }{\b\i\f1 me}{\i\f1  is the same as subject and object, so that
 it could also be translated "we" as a short independent pronoun, and it can also receive case endings, e.g. allative }{\b\i\f1 mello}{\i\f1  "from us", dative }{\b\i\f1 men}{\i\f1  "for us" -Nam/RGEO:67, VT43:19
\par   }{\f1 USEFUL }{\b\f1 m\'e1ra }{\f1 (fit, good) }{\i\f1 -MA3
\par 
\par }{\b\i\f1\fs24   }{\b\f1\fs24 <V>}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 VAGUE }{\b\f1 n\'e9ca }{\f1 (faint, dim to see) }{\i\f1 -MC:223
\par   }{\f1 VALE }{\i\f1 (dark) }{\b\f1 tumb\'eb }{\f1 (deep valley) }{\i\f1 -LT:269
\par  *}{\f1 VALIAN }{\b\f1 valarinwa}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 attested in }{\b\i\f1 Lamb\'eb Valarinwa }{\i\f1 "the language of the Valar, *Valian Language". Cf. also }{\b\i\f1 valaina}{\f1  }{\i\f1 "of the Valar, belonging to the Valar"}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (divine) }{\i\f1 
-WJ:395, BAL}{\f1 
\par   VALLEY }{\b\f1 nan }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 nand-}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 tumbo }{\i\f1 (deep valley under/among hills, dark vale; so in Etym, Silm:438 and LT1:269. Letters:308 gives }{\b\i\f1 tumba }{\i\f1 "deep valley".) }{\f1 VALLEY }{\i\f1 (adj.) }{\b\f1 nalda}{\f1 
; "VALLEY OF SINGING GOLD" }{\b\f1 Laurelindorinan}{\f1  (L\'f3rien). -}{\i\f1 TUB, LotR:488 cf. Letters:308, LT1:261, UT:449
\par   }{\f1 VALOUR }{\b\f1 c\'e1n\'eb }{\i\f1 -KAN
\par   }{\f1 VANISHED }{\b\f1 vanwa }{\f1 (gone, departed, dead, lost, past and over) }{\i\f1 -WAN, Nam, WJ:366
\par   }{\f1 VAST }{\i\f1 - LT2 gives }{\b\i\f1 aica}{\i\f1  "broad, vast", but }{\b\i\f1 aica }{\i\f1 is said to mean "sharp" in later writings. -LT2:338
\par   }{\f1 VEIL }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 halya- }{\f1 (conceal, screen from ligh); "VEILS, RAYMENT" }{\b\f1 fana }{\i\f1 (pl }{\b\i\f1 fanar}{\i\f1  is attested. This word was used of the visible bodies in which the Valar presented themselves to incarnates.) }{
\f1 VEILED }{\b\f1 halda }{\f1 (hidden, shadowed, shady) }{\i\f1 -SKAL, RGEO:74
\par   }{\f1 VENUS }{\b\f1 E\'e4rendil }{\i\f1 (Basic Quenya:24, cf. Silm:55)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Tancol }{\f1 ("}{\i\f1 Signifer"}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 "the significant star" - MR:385)}{\f1 
\par   VERDIGRIS }{\b\f1 lairus}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 lairust}{\f1 -) }{\i\f1 -VT41:10
\par }{\f1  }{\i\f1  }{\f1 VESSEL }{\b\f1 ven\'eb }{\f1 (small boat, dish) }{\i\f1 -LT1:254
\par }{\f1   VESTMENT }{\b\f1 colla}{\f1  (cloak) }{\i\f1 -MR:385
\par   }{\f1 VICTORY }{\b\f1 t\'far\'eb }{\f1 (mastery), }{\b\f1 apair\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -TUR, GL:17
\par   }{\f1 VIGIL }{\b\f1 tiris }{\f1 (watch) }{\i\f1 -LT1:258
\par   }{\f1 VIGOUR }{\b\f1 tuo }{\f1 (muscle, sinew, strength), }{\b\f1 vi\'eb }{\f1 (manhood), }{\b\f1 v\'ebass\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 laito/laisi }{\f1 (new life, youth); VIGOROUS }{\b\f1 v\'eba}{\f1  (adult, manly)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -TUG, LT1:267, WEG
\par   }{\f1 VILLAGE }{\b\f1 masto}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 (walled:) }{\b\f1 opel\'eb }{\f1 (town) }{\i\f1 -LT1:251, PEL(ES)
\par   }{\f1 VINE }{\b\f1 liantass\'eb }{\i\f1 -LT1:271
\par   }{\f1 VIOLENCE }{\b\f1 orm\'eb }{\f1 (rushing, wrath, haste); VIOLENT }{\b\f1 naraca }{\f1 (harsh, rending) }{\i\f1 -GOR, KHOR, N\'c1RAK
\par   }{\f1 VIOLET }{\b\f1 helin}{\f1 ,}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 Helinyetill\'eb }{\i\f1 ("Eyes of heartsease") }{\f1 (pansy) -}{\i\f1 LT1:262
\par   }{\f1 VIRGINITY }{\b\f1 v\'e9n\'eb }{\i\f1 (with the alternative, probably older [MET] form }{\b\i\f1 w\'e9n\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 veness\'eb }{\i\f1 -WEN
\par   }{\f1 VOCALIC EXTENSION }{\b\f1 \'f3mataina }{\i\f1 (i.e., the addition to the base of a final vowel identical to the base vowel }{\f1 [sund\'f3ma]}{\i\f1 ) -WJ:417
\par   }{\f1 VOICE }{\b\f1 \'f3ma }{\i\f1 (pl instrumental }{\b\i\f1 \'f3mainen }{\i\f1 "with voices" is attested. In some words, }{\b\i\f1 \'f3ma }{\i\f1 is translated "vowel", q.v.) -OM, WJ:391, VT39:16 (the latter source defines }{\b\i\f1 \'f3ma}{\i\f1 
 as "voice, resonance of the vocal chords")}{\f1 
\par   VOID }{\b\f1 lusta }{\f1 (empty), }{\b\f1 c\'fama }{\i\f1 (the Void) -LUS, KUM
\par   }{\f1 VOWEL #}{\b\f1 \'f3m\'eba}{\f1  (only pl. }{\b\f1 \'f3m\'ebar}{\f1  attested), also #}{\b\f1 \'f3ma-tengw\'eb}{\f1 , #}{\b\f1 \'f3matengw\'eb}{\f1  (this term refers to vowels considered as independent phonemes, according to F\'eb
anor's new insights on phonemics; only pl. }{\b\f1 \'f3matengwi}{\f1  is attested), }{\b\f1 \'f3man}{\f1  (pl. "amandi", probably misreading for *}{\b\f1 omandi}{\f1 ; this term from the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1 
 may in any case be obsoleted by the above-mentioned forms), #}{\b\f1 lehta tengw\'eb}{\f1  (lit. "free/relased element"; only pl. }{\b\f1 lehta tengwi}{\f1  is attested; we would rather expect *}{\b\f1 leht\'eb tengwi}{\f1 ). }{\i\f1 (Note: In some co
mpounds, }{\b\i\f1 \'f3ma }{\i\f1 seems to mean "vowel" instead of "voice": VOWEL SIGN #}{\b\i\f1 \'f3matehta }{\i\f1 (only pl }{\b\i\f1 \'f3matehtar }{\i\f1 is attested), DETERMINANT VOWEL }{\b\i\f1 sund\'f3ma}{\i\f1 , VOCALIC EXTENSION }{\b\i\f1 \'f3
mataina}{\i\f1  (q.v. for definition)}{\f1 . Yet another term for "vowel", #}{\b\f1 penna}{\f1  pl. }{\b\f1 pennar}{\f1 , is given in VT39:16, but this is taken from a draft and not included in the final text Tolkien wrote.}{\i\f1  }{\f1 - The term #}{
\b\f1 muss\'eb tengw\'eb}{\f1  "soft element" (only attested in the pl.: }{\b\f1 muss\'eb tengwi}{\f1 ) covers vowels, semi-vowels (}{\i\f1 y}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 w}{\f1 ) and continuants (}{\i\f1 l}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 r}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 m}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 n}{\f1 ). }{
\i\f1 -VT39:8/16, OM, WJ:396, 319, 417, VT39:17
\par   
\par }{\b\f1\fs24   <W>}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 WAIF }{\b\f1 hecil}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (gender-spesific forms are }{\b\i\f1 hecilo }{\i\f1 m. and }{\b\i\f1 hecil\'eb }{\i\f1 f.) }{\f1 (one lost or forsaken by friends, outcast, outlaw) }{\i\f1 -WJ:365}{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1   WAILING }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 yaim\'eb}{\f1 ;}{\b\f1  }{\f1 WAILING }{\i\f1 (adj) }{\b\f1 yaim\'eba }{\i\f1 -MC:223
\par   }{\f1 WAIN }{\i\f1 (the constellation) see }{\f1 SICKLE OF THE VALAR   }{\i\f1 
\par   }{\f1 WAKENING }{\i\f1 (adj) }{\b\f1 cuiv\'eba }{\f1 (awakening) }{\i\f1 -KUY
\par   }{\f1 WALK }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 vanta-}{\f1 ; WALK }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 vanta }{\i\f1 -BAT
\par   }{\f1 WALL }{\b\f1 ramba}{\f1 ; WALL AND MOAT }{\b\f1 ossa}{\f1 ; TOWN WITH WALLS AND TOWERS }{\b\f1 tirios }{\i\f1 -RAMB\'c2/Silm:436, LT1:258, LT2:336
\par  *}{\f1 WANDER }{\b\f1 ranya-}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 (only glossed }{\f1 stray}{\i\f1  under }{\f1 RAN}{\i\f1 , but cf. Silm:436: "}{\f1 ran- }{\i\f1 'wander, stray'" and the following word:) }{\f1 WANDERING }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 r\'e1n\'eb }{\f1 (straying) }
{\i\f1 (pl. probably }{\b\i\f1 *r\'e1ner }{\i\f1 not }{\b\i\f1 r\'e1ni}{\i\f1 ; cf. the similar formation }{\b\i\f1 ty\'e1v\'eb }{\i\f1 "taste" pl }{\b\i\f1 ty\'e1ver}{\i\f1 .) }{\f1 WANDERER }{\b\f1 R\'e1na }{\i\f1 (a name of the Moon)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 
#ran }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 Palarran }{\i\f1 "far-wanderer", the name of a ship) -RAN, Silm:436, UT:460, 461
\par   }{\f1 WANT #}{\b\f1 mer}{\f1 -}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (cited in the form }{\b\f1 mer\'eb}{\f1 , evidently the 3rd person aorist; pa.t. given as }{\b\f1 mern\'eb}{\f1 )}{\i\f1  }{\f1 (wish, desire) }{\i\f1 -MER
\par   }{\f1 WAR }{\b\f1 ohta }{\i\f1 -OKT\'c2, KOT
\par   }{\f1 WARM }{\b\f1 lauca }{\i\f1 -LAW
\par   }{\f1 WARRIOR }{\b\f1 ohtatyaro}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ohtar}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 #mehtar }{\i\f1 (isolated from }{\b\i\f1 Telumehtar }{\i\f1 "Orion, warrior of the sky", a word occurring in LotR. Etym gives }{\b\i\f1 mahtar }{\i\f1 "warrior" under MAK, but }{
\b\i\f1 Telumehtar }{\i\f1 not }{\b\i\f1 **Telumahtar}{\i\f1  under TEL)}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 LT1:268 also has }{\b\i\f1 mordo }{\i\f1 "warrior, hero", but in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 mordo }{\i\f1 means "obscurity, shadow, stain".}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 
-KYAR (see KAR), UT:458, LotR:1146, MAK, TEL
\par   }{\f1 WARWICKSHIRE }{\b\f1 Alalmin\'f3r\'eb }{\f1 (Land of Elms) }{\i\f1 -LT1:249
\par   }{\f1 WATCH }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 tirin }{\i\f1 ("I watch", 1st pers. aorist)}{\f1 , pa.t. }{\b\f1 tirn\'eb}{\f1 ; fut. }{\b\f1 tiruva }{\f1 is attested (heed), WATCH-TOWER }{\b\f1 tirion}{\f1 ; WATCH }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (vigil) }{\i\f1 
-TIR, MC:222 cf. 215, LT1:258, LT1:268
\par   }{\f1 WATER }{\b\f1 n\'e9n }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 nen}{\f1 -) }{\i\f1 (LT1:262 also has }{\b\i\f1 linqu\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 ; WATER-FALL }{\i\f1 - LT1:249 gives }{\b\i\f1 axa}{\i\f1 , but this is probably obsoleted by }{\b\i\f1 axa }{\i\f1 "narrow path" in Etym; 
}{\f1 WATERY }{\b\f1 nenda }{\f1 (wet), WATER-MEAD, WATERED PLAIN }{\b\f1 nanda}{\f1 ; WATER-LOVERS }{\b\f1 Nendili }{\f1 (used of the Lindar), WATER-VESSEL }{\b\f1 calpa}{\f1 ; DRAW WATER }{\b\f1 calpa- }{\f1 (scoop out, bale out); ISSUE OF WATER }{
\b\f1 ehtel\'eb }{\f1 (fountain, spring, }{\i\f1 also }{\b\i\f1 cehtel\'eb}{\i\f1 , see FOUNTAIN)}{\f1 , }{\i\f1  }{\f1 WATER FALLING OUT SWIFTLY FROM A ROCKY SPRING }{\b\f1 celuss\'eb }{\f1 (freshlet),}{\i\f1  }{\f1 YELLOW WATER-LILY }{\b\f1 n\'e9nu }{
\i\f1 -NEN, WJ:410, NAD, KALPA, KEL, UT:426, LT1:248 
\par   }{\f1 WAVE }{\i\f1 (crested) }{\b\f1 falma}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (partitive plural allative }{\b\i\f1 falmalinnar }{\i\f1 is attested. LT1:266 has }{\b\i\f1 solm\'eb}{\i\f1  instead of }{\b\i\f1 falma}{\i\f1 .) -PHAL, Nam/RGEO:67
\par   }{\f1 WAX }{\b\f1 l\'edco}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 neit\'eb }{\i\f1 -MC:223, GL:60
\par   }{\f1 WAY }{\b\f1 ti\'eb}{\f1  (path, course, line, direction, road), #}{\b\f1 vanda }{\i\f1 (isolated form }{\b\i\f1 Qualvanda}{\i\f1  "Road of Death" in LT1:264; cf. }{\b\i\f1 vand- }{\i\f1 "way, path" on the same page)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
-TE3/RGEO:67, LT1:264
\par   }{\f1 WE (see also US) - }{\i\f1 Quenya has several endings for "we". A distinction is made between inclusive "we", including the person(s) addressed, and }{\f1 exclusive }{\i\f1 "we", a "we" that does not include the 
person(s) addressed. There is also a distinction between singular and dual forms, the dual forms referring to a "we" of two persons (the speaker and one other person), while the plural forms refer to a "we" of at least three people. Relevant pronominal en
dings are -}{\b\i\f1 lm\'eb}{\i\f1 , -}{\b\i\f1 lv\'eb}{\i\f1 /*-}{\b\i\f1 lw\'eb}{\i\f1 , -}{\b\i\f1 ngw\'eb}{\i\f1  and -}{\b\i\f1 mm\'eb}{\i\f1 . However, Tolkien repeatedly revised the precise application of these endings. In one conceptual phase, -}{
\b\i\f1 mm\'eb}{\i\f1  was pl. exclusive "we", as in }{\b\i\f1 vamm\'eb }{\i\f1 "we won't" (WJ:371), whereas -}{\b\i\f1 lm\'eb}{\i\f1  was pl. inclusive "we". In the mid-
sixties, when the revised edition of LotR appeared, Tolkien had apparently changed the system so that -}{\b\i\f1 lm\'eb}{\i\f1  had become exclusive "we" (rather than inclusive as before), and now *-}{\b\i\f1 lv\'eb}{\i\f1  (and/or -}{\b\i\f1 lw\'eb}{
\i\f1 , VT42:34) was the ending for pl. inclusive "we". The ending -}{\b\i\f1 mm\'eb}{\i\f1 
 was now assigned a "dual" meaning (VT43:6), but it is unclear whether this is dual inclusive "we" (i.e. "thou and I") or dual exclusive "we" (i.e. "I and one other person"), or indeed whether the inclusive/exclusive distinction is upheld in the dual pr
onouns. The ending -}{\b\i\f1 ngw\'eb}{\i\f1  denoted pl. inclusive "we" at one stage (VT43:36), but this apparently became -}{\b\i\f1 lm\'eb}{\i\f1  later. If -}{\b\i\f1 mm\'eb}{\i\f1  is dual }{\f1 exclusive}{\i\f1  "we", -}{\b\i\f1 ngw\'eb}{\i\f1 
 may conceivably have been re-assigned the meaning of }{\f1 dual inclusive}{\i\f1  "we"}{\f1 .}{\i\f1  The emphatic, independent forms of these pronouns would be *}{\b\i\f1 elm\'eb}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 *elv\'eb}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 emm\'eb}{\i\f1 , *}{
\b\i\f1 engw\'eb}{\i\f1  (}{\b\i\f1 emm\'eb}{\i\f1  occurs in Tolkien's translation of the Hail Mary, but there reflecting the older meaning of -}{\b\i\f1 mm\'eb}{\i\f1 
: pl. exclusive "we", not a dual form like it later became). -WJ:371, LotR:989, 94, cf. Letters:447, VT42:36, VT43:34
\par   }{\f1 WEAL, WEALTH }{\b\f1 alma }{\f1 (good fortune), }{\b\f1 ausi\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 aut\'eb }{\f1 (prosperity, }{\i\f1 also adj: }{\f1 rich) WEALTHY }{\b\f1 herenya}{\f1  (blessed, fortuneate, rich) }{\i\f1 -GALA, LT2:336, KHER
\par   }{\f1 WEAR }{\i\f1 see BEAR. }{\f1 WEAR (OUT) }{\b\f1 yerya- }{\f1 (get old) }{\i\f1 (Note: }{\b\i\f1 yerya }{\i\f1 is also the adjective "old, worn") -GYER
\par   }{\f1 WEATHER - }{\i\f1 dark weather: }{\b\f1 l\'far\'eb }{\i\f1 -LT1:259
\par   }{\f1 WEAVE }{\b\f1 lanya-}{\f1 ; EVER-WEAVING }{\b\f1 Vair\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (name of a Vali\'eb)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -LAN, VT39:10
\par   }{\f1 WEB }{\b\f1 nats\'eb }{\f1 (net); SPIDER'S WEB }{\b\f1 ungw\'eb }{\i\f1 -NAT, LotR:1157
\par   }{\f1 WED }{\b\f1 vesta}{\f1 -; WEDDING }{\b\f1 vestal\'eb }{\i\f1 -BES, WED
\par   }{\f1 WEDGE }{\b\f1 neht\'eb }{\f1 (spearhead, gore, narrow promontory) }{\i\f1 -UT:282
\par }{\f1   WEEK}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 lemnar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (from a root meaning "five", since the Valian week had five days) }{\b\f1 enqui\'eb }{\i\f1 (from a root meaning "six", since the Eldarin week had six days)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 otsola}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
(evidently meaning a seven-day week like our own, as }{\b\i\f1 otso}{\i\f1  = seven) -LEP, LotR:1141 cf. \'c9NEK, GL:62
\par   }{\f1 WEEPING }{\b\f1 ny\'e9ny\'eb }{\i\f1 -LT1:262
\par   }{\f1 WEFT }{\b\f1 lanat}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 wist\'eb }{\i\f1 -LAN , LT1:254
\par   }{\f1 WENT }{\b\f1 lend\'eb }{\f1 (departed) }{\i\f1 (past tense of }{\b\i\f1 lelya-}{\i\f1 /}{\b\i\f1 linna- }{\i\f1 "go") LT1:264 gives }{\b\i\f1 v\'e1}{\i\f1 , but this is probably not a valid word in LotR-style Quenya. -LED, WJ:363
\par   }{\f1 WEREWOLF }{\b\f1 nauro }{\i\f1 (In Etym, this word is spelt with initial }{\b\i\f1 \'f1}{\i\f1 , that is, }{\b\i\f1 ng}{\i\f1 . Initial }{\b\i\f1 ng }{\i\f1 had become }{\b\i\f1 n }{\i\f1 
in Third Age Quenya, and I follow the system of LotR and transcribe it accordingly. But if this word is written in Tengwar, the initial }{\b\i\f1 n }{\i\f1 should be transcribed with the letter }{\b\i\f1 noldo}{\i\f1 , not }{\b\i\f1 n\'famen}{\i\f1 
.) -NGAW
\par   }{\f1 WEST }{\b\f1 n\'famen}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (so in Etym and LotR; }{\b\i\f1 N\'famen }{\i\f1 is capitalized in UT:305; this word obsoletes }{\b\i\f1 n\'fam\'eb }{\i\f1 in LT1:263),}{\f1  }{\b\f1 and\'fan\'eb }{\f1 (sunset, evening); WESTERN }{\b\f1 n\'fa
menya}{\f1 ; IN THE WEST }{\b\f1 n\'fam\'eba}{\f1 ; WESTLAND }{\i\f1 see }{\f1 WESTERNESSE; WESTLANDS }{\b\f1 Andustar }{\i\f1 (a region in N\'famenor)}{\f1  "WEST-WINGS" }{\i\f1 (the name of a ship) }{\b\f1 N\'famerr\'e1mar }{\i\f1 -LotR:1157/ND\'db
, Nam,  UT:305, Silm:428, LT1:263, UT:165, 419, UT:175, 458
\par   }{\f1 WESTERNESSE, WESTLAND }{\b\f1 N\'famenor}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 (full form }{\b\i\f1 N\'famen\'f3r\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -Silm:313, 414
\par }{\b\f1   }{\f1 WET }{\b\f1 mixa}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 linqu\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (obsoleting }{\b\i\f1 liquin }{\i\f1 in LT1:262)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 nenda }{\f1 (watery) }{\i\f1 -MISK, NEN, LINKWI
\par   }{\f1 WHAT }{\i\f1 see }{\f1 WHO     
\par   WHEREIN }{\b\f1 yassen }{\i\f1 (refering back to a pl word; sg #}{\b\i\f1 yass\'eb}{\i\f1 ) -Nam, RGEO:66, 67}{\f1 
\par   WHICH }{\b\f1 ya }{\i\f1 (known from the Arctic sentece and attested with a plural locative ending in Nam: }{\b\i\f1 yassen}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 "which-in, wherein". See WHO concerning relative pronouns.) -Nam, RGEO:66
\par   }{\f1 WHINING }{\b\f1 miul\'eb }{\f1 (mewing) -}{\i\f1 MIW
\par   }{\f1 WHIRLPOOL }{\b\f1 hwind\'eb }{\i\f1 -SWIN
\par   }{\f1 WHISPER }{\i\f1 (vb)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 lussa}{\f1 -; WHISPERING SOUND }{\b\f1 luss\'eb }{\i\f1 -SLUS
\par   }{\f1 WHITE }{\b\f1 ninqu\'eb }{\f1 (chill, pallid), }{\b\f1 f\'e1na}{\f1 /}{\b\f1 f\'e1n\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (prob. associated with the whiteness of clouds, }{\b\i\f1 fanyar}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 loss\'eb }{\i\f1 (snow-white)}{\f1 .}{\i\f1  -NIK-W-/GL:
60/Silm:435 cf. WJ:417, RGEO:69, MC:221-223
\par   }{\f1 WHO}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 man }{\i\f1 (so in Nam and MC:222; MC:221 one place has }{\b\i\f1 men}{\i\f1 , but that is evidently an error, for }{\b\i\f1 man }{\i\f1 occurs in the same text. In FS and LR:59/63, }{\b\i\f1 man }{\i\f1 
is translated "what". Either Tolkien later adjusted the meaning of the word, or }{\b\i\f1 man }{\i\f1 covers the meaning of both "who" and "what".) Note: this "who" is used only in questions. The relative pronoun "who, which, that" is }{\b\i\f1 i }{\i\f1 
or }{\b\i\f1 ya}{\i\f1 : }{\b\i\f1 i Eru i or ily\'eb mahalmar \'eba }{\i\f1 "the One who is above all thrones", }{\b\i\f1 i carir quettar \'f3mainen }{\i\f1 "(those) who form words with voices"}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 A pronoun }{\b\i\f1 ya }{\i\f1 
*"which" is found in the "Arctic" sentence; }{\b\i\f1 yassen }{\i\f1 "in which" in Nam is evidently this pronoun + a plural locative ending. From our very few examples it may seem that }{\b\i\f1 i }{\i\f1 is used when the relative pronoun is the s
ubject of the relative clause, while }{\b\i\f1 ya }{\i\f1 is used when it is its object: }{\b\i\f1 *i Orco i tirn\'eb Findar\'e1to }{\i\f1 "the Orc that watched Finrod", *}{\b\i\f1 i Orco ya Findar\'e1to tirn\'eb}{\i\f1 
 "the Orc that Finrod watched". By another interpretation, }{\b\i\f1 i}{\i\f1  as a relative pronoun is used with reference to animates or sentients (English "who"), while }{\b\i\f1 ya}{\i\f1 
 is used with reference to things or abstracts (English "which"). Whatever the case, }{\b\i\f1 ya }{\i\f1 presumably becomes }{\b\i\f1 *yar }{\i\f1 in the pl [*}{\b\i\f1 i nati yar}{\i\f1 ... "the things that..."], while }{\b\i\f1 i }{\i\f1 
is indeclinable. -Nam/MC:222, WJ:391, UT:305, 317, Arct
\par   }{\f1 WHOEVER }{\b\f1 aiquen }{\f1 (if anybody) }{\i\f1 -WJ:372
\par   }{\f1 WHOLE }{\b\f1 ilya }{\f1 (all), THE WHOLE }{\b\f1 il\'fav\'eb }{\f1 (the All, Allness, universe) }{\i\f1 -IL, Silm:433
\par   }{\f1 WHOLLY }{\b\f1 aqua }{\f1 (fully, completely, altogether) }{\i\f1 -WJ:392
\par   }{\f1 WIDE }{\b\f1 palla}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 landa}{\f1 ; FAR AND WIDE }{\b\f1 palan}{\f1 ; THE WIDE WORLD }{\b\f1 Palurin }{\i\f1 -PAL, LAD, Silm:435, LT1:264
\par   }{\f1 WIELD }{\b\f1 turin }{\i\f1 ("I wield", 1st pers. aorist)}{\f1 , pa.t. }{\b\f1 turn\'eb}{\f1  (control, govern). WIELD, esp. WIELD A WEAPON }{\b\f1 mahta- }{\f1 (fight, handle, manage) }{\i\f1 -TUR, MAK/VT39:10, MA3
\par }{\f1   WIFE }{\b\f1 vess\'eb }{\i\f1 (In UT, }{\b\i\f1 indis}{\i\f1  is translated "wife"; in Etym this word is glossed "bride".)  -BES, UT:8 cf. NDIS
\par   }{\f1 WILD }{\b\f1 verca}{\f1 , #}{\b\f1 hravan}{\f1  (only pl. }{\b\f1 hravani }{\f1 is attested; }{\b\f1 Hravani }{\f1 the "Wild" was used in Exilic Quenya to designate Men not belonging to the three houses of the Edain.) }{\i\f1 -BER\'c9K, WJ:219

\par   }{\f1 WILDERNESS }{\b\f1 r\'e1va }{\i\f1 (Note: a homophone means "riverbank") -RAB
\par   }{\f1 WILL }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 n\'edra}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (= "will" as a potential or faculty, while "act of will" is }{\b\i\f1 nirm\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 , *}{\b\f1 selma }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 
("a fixed idea, will". In WJ:319, the word is given as }{\b\i\f1 \'deelma}{\i\f1 , but }{\b\i\f1 \'de}{\i\f1  (}{\b\i\f1 th}{\i\f1 )}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 would become }{\b\i\f1 s }{\i\f1 in the Noldorin Quenya. Cf. }{\b\i\f1 \'deind\'eb}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 
sind\'eb }{\i\f1 in WJ:384)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -VT39:30/VT41:6, 17; WJ:319
\par   }{\f1 WILL NOT - }{\i\f1 I will not: }{\b\f1 v\'e1 }{\i\f1 (exclamation, also =}{\f1  Do not!); }{\b\f1 avan}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 v\'e1n}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 vany\'eb }{\f1 "I won't", }{\b\f1 avamm\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 vamm\'eb }{\f1 "we won't" -}{\i\f1 WJ:371
\par   }{\f1 WILLOW-TREE }{\b\f1 tasar}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tasar\'eb }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (probably obsoleting }{\b\i\f1 tasarin }{\i\f1 in LT2:346) -TATHAR/Silm:438
\par   }{\f1 WIND }{\b\f1 s\'far\'eb }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ?)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (instrumental form }{\b\i\f1 s\'farinen }{\i\f1 is attested)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 s\'falim\'eb}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (also the name of the month of March)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 
vaiwa}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 waiwa }{\i\f1 (the latter is probably an older [MET] form)}{\f1 ; NOISE OF WIND }{\b\f1 s\'fa}{\f1 , WINDY }{\b\f1 wanwavoit\'eb }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 wanwavoisi}{\i\f1 )}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -MC:222 cf. 215, LT1:266, Nam/RGEO:66, W\'c2
, LT1:266
\par   }{\f1 WIND UP }{\b\f1 telya- }{\f1 (}{\i\f1 transitive) }{\f1 (conclude, finish) -}{\i\f1 WJ:411
\par   }{\f1 WINE }{\b\f1 miru}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 limp\'eb }{\f1 (the drink of the Valar, or of the fairies). }{\i\f1 The word }{\b\i\f1 m\'edruv\'f3r\'eb}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 m\'edruvor }{\i\f1 
is defined as "a special wine or cordial.") -LT1:261, LIP, LT1:258, WJ:399
\par   }{\f1 WING }{\b\f1 r\'e1ma }{\i\f1 (Pl. }{\b\i\f1 r\'e1mar }{\i\f1 and plural instrumental form }{\b\i\f1 r\'e1mainen }{\i\f1 are attested. The form #}{\b\i\f1 r\'e1m\'eb}{\i\f1 , occurring in the ship-name }{\b\i\f1 E\'e4rr\'e1m\'eb }{\i\f1 
"Sea-Wing", evidently has a feminine ending.)
\par }{\f1 HAVING WINGS }{\b\f1 r\'e1mavoit\'eb}{\f1  (pl. prob. }{\b\f1 *r\'e1mavoisi}{\f1 , cf. LEAPING, WINDY), "WEST-WINGS" }{\i\f1 (the name of a ship) }{\b\f1 N\'famerr\'e1mar }{\i\f1 -RAM/LT2:335, MC:222, Silm:295, UT:175, 458
\par   }{\f1 WINTER }{\b\f1 hr\'edv\'eb}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 (in early [TLT] material:)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 Yelin}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Hesin}{\f1 .}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (In the Calendar of Imladris, }{\b\i\f1 hr\'edv\'eb }{\i\f1 
was a precisely defined period of 72 days, but the word was also used without any exact definition.) }{\b\i\f1 Lasselanta }{\i\f1 "leaf-fall" could be used for the beginning of winter, but the usual translation of this word is "autumn". "}{\f1 
WINTER ONE" }{\b\f1 Hescil }{\i\f1 (a title of Nienna "who breedeth winter", LT1:66, 255) -LotR:1141, 1145; LT1:255, LT1:260
\par }{\b\f1   }{\f1 WISDOM }{\b\f1 nolw\'eb}{\f1  (secret lore, }{\i\f1 obsoleting }{\b\i\f1 n\'f3lem\'eb }{\i\f1 in LT1:263}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 n\'f3l\'eb}{\f1  (long study, lore, knowledge) }{\i\f1 (In Etym these words, as well as }{\b\i\f1 n\'f3la }{\i\f1 
below, are spelt with initial }{\b\i\f1 \'f1}{\i\f1 , that is, }{\b\i\f1 ng}{\i\f1 . Initial }{\b\i\f1 ng }{\i\f1 had become }{\b\i\f1 n }{\i\f1 in Third Age Quenya, and I follow the system of LotR and transcribe it accordingly. }{\b\i\f1 N\'f3l\'eb }{
\i\f1 is so spelt also in Silm:432. But if these words are written in Tengwar, the initial }{\b\i\f1 n }{\i\f1 should be transcribed with the letter }{\b\i\f1 noldo}{\i\f1 , not }{\b\i\f1 n\'famen}{\i\f1 .) }{\f1 WISE #}{\b\f1 saila}{\f1  (isolated from }
{\b\f1 alasaila}{\f1  "unwise"), }{\b\f1 n\'f3la}{\f1  (learned), }{\b\f1 saira}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 istima }{\f1 (having knowledge, learned), }{\b\f1 iswa}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 isqua}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -NGOL, VT41:13, 18, Silm:432, IS, SAY, LT2:339
\par   }{\f1 WISH }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\f1 #}{\b\f1 mer}{\f1 -}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (cited in the form }{\b\f1 mer\'eb}{\f1 , evidently the 3rd person aorist; pa.t. given as }{\b\f1 mern\'eb}{\f1 )}{\i\f1  }{\f1 (wish, desire); WISH TO GO TO A PLACE }{\b\f1 m\'edna}{\f1 
- (desire to go in some direction, make for it, have some end in view).}{\i\f1  -MER, VT39:11
\par   }{\f1 WITCH }{\i\f1 (of the good magic) }{\b\f1 curuni }{\i\f1 -LT1:269
\par   }{\f1 WITHER }{\b\f1 hesta-}{\f1 , WITHERED }{\b\f1 hessa }{\f1 (dead) -}{\i\f1 LT1:255
\par   }{\f1 WITHIN }{\b\f1 mi }{\i\f1 (see }{\f1 IN}{\i\f1 ) -MI}{\f1 
\par   WITHOUT }{\i\f1 (adj & prep)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 \'fa}{\f1  (usually followed by genitive: }{\b\f1 \'fa calo}{\f1  "without light [}{\i\f1 cala}{\f1 ]") (destitute of). WITHOUT BEAUTY }{\b\f1 \'favan\'eb}{\f1 , adj. }{\b\f1 \'favan\'eba}{\f1  -}{\i\f1 VT39:14

\par   }{\f1 WIZARD }{\b\f1 istar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (nom. pl. }{\b\i\f1 istari }{\i\f1 and gen.pl. }{\b\i\f1 istarion }{\i\f1 are attested)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 sairon}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 curuvar}{\f1  WIZARDRY }{\i\f1 - in LT1:269, }{\b\i\f1 curu }{\i\f1 
is glossed "magic, wizardry", but in Etym the gloss is simply "skill".}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -LotR:1121, UT:388, cf. IS, SAY; LT1:269
\par   }{\f1 WOLF }{\b\f1 r\'e1ca}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 narmo}{\f1 , WEREWOLF }{\b\f1 nauro}{\f1 ; WOLFHOWL }{\b\f1 naul\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (In Etym, }{\b\i\f1 narmo}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 nauro}{\i\f1  and }{\b\i\f1 naul\'eb }{\i\f1 are spelt with initial }{\b\i\f1 \'f1}
{\i\f1 , that is, }{\b\i\f1 ng}{\i\f1 . Initial }{\b\i\f1 ng }{\i\f1 had become }{\b\i\f1 n }{\i\f1 in Third Age Quenya, and I follow the system of LotR and transcribe it accordingly. But if these words are written in Tengwar, the initial }{\b\i\f1 n }{
\i\f1 should be transcribed with the letter }{\b\i\f1 noldo}{\i\f1 , not }{\b\i\f1 n\'famen}{\i\f1 .) -DAR\'c1K,  NGAR(A)M, NGAW 
\par   }{\f1 WOMAN }{\b\f1 n\'eds }{\i\f1 (so in MR:213, Etym gives }{\b\i\f1 nis}{\i\f1 , but both sources agree that the pl is}{\f1  }{\b\i\f1 nissi}{\i\f1 .}{\f1  }{\i\f1 An alternative form of }{\b\i\f1 n\'eds}{\i\f1 /}{\b\i\f1 nis }{\i\f1 is }{\b\i\f1 
niss\'eb}{\i\f1 , clashing with }{\b\i\f1 *niss\'eb }{\i\f1 "in me". Writers should use the short sg }{\b\i\f1 n\'eds}{\i\f1 , as Tolkien himself does in MR:213)}{\f1 ; \'86}{\b\f1 n\'ed }{\f1 (female) }{\i\f1 -NDIS/N\'ce/NIS, MR:213, N\'ce, INI
\par }{\f1   WON'T }{\i\f1 see WILL NOT
\par }{\f1   WOOD }{\b\f1 toa}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (probably "wood" as a material rather than "wood" = "forest"; not to be confused with the homophone adj. }{\b\i\f1 toa}{\i\f1  "of wool, woollen")}{\f1 , GREAT WOOD }{\b\f1 taur\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 
tauri }{\i\f1 is attested) }{\f1 (forest)}{\i\f1 ,}{\f1  }{\i\f1 wood as material: }{\b\f1 tavar}{\f1  (replaced by }{\b\f1 toa}{\f1 ?), }{\i\f1 rough piece of wood: }{\b\f1 runda}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 peace of shaped wood: }{\b\f1 pano}{\f1 ,}{\i\f1 
 smouldering wood (ember): }{\b\f1 yulm\'eb }{\i\f1 (Note: }{\b\i\f1 yulm\'eb }{\i\f1 also means "drinking, carousal") firewood: }{\b\f1 turu}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 ("firewood" was the proper meaning, but the word was used for "wood" in general); }{\f1 
OF WOOD }{\b\f1 taurina}{\f1 , WOODEN }{\b\f1 tur\'fava}{\f1 , WOODEN POST }{\b\f1 samna}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ); WOODEN HALL }{\b\f1 ampano}{\f1 , WOODPECKER }{\b\f1 tambaro}{\f1 , WOODLAND }{\b\f1 tavas }{\i\f1 (LT1:261 also gives }{\b\i\f1 nan}{
\i\f1 (}{\b\i\f1 d}{\i\f1 ), but this means "valley" in LotR-style Quenya.) -VT39:6, T\'c1WAR/Silm:438/MC:222 cf. 215, RUD, PAN, YUL, LT1:270, STAB, TAM, LT1:267
\par   }{\f1 WOOF }{\b\f1 winda }{\i\f1 -LT1:254
\par   }{\f1 WOOL }{\b\f1 t\'f3}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (obsoleting }{\b\i\f1 oa }{\i\f1 in LT1:249; GL:71 has }{\b\i\f1 toa}{\i\f1 , but cf the following:)}{\b\f1  }{\f1 OF WOOL, WOOLLEN }{\b\f1 toa}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (not to be confused with the homophone }{\b\i\f1 toa}{
\i\f1  "wool") -TOW
\par   }{\f1 WORD }{\b\f1 quetta }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 quettar }{\i\f1 is attested. LT2:348 gives }{\b\i\f1 quent}{\i\f1 ; this word is no doubt obsolete in LotR-style Quenya. GL:28 has "qetta-") -Silm:436, WJ:391
\par   }{\f1 WORLD }{\b\f1 Ambar }{\f1 (earth), THE WIDE WORLD }{\b\f1 Palurin}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (LT2 gives }{\b\i\f1 irmin }{\i\f1 "the world, all the regions inhabited by Men"; this is probably not a valid word in LotR-style Quenya.)}{\f1  OF THE WORLD }{\b\f1 
marda }{\i\f1 (an adjective, *"wordly")}{\f1 ; THE ENDING OF THE WORLD }{\b\f1 Ambar-metta}{\f1 ; "WORLD-ARTIFICER" }{\b\f1 Martamo }{\i\f1 (a title of Aul\'eb)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -LotR:1003 cf. MBAR; LT1:251, 264, LT2:343, LT1:266
\par   }{\f1 WORN }{\b\f1 yerna }{\f1 (old }{\i\f1 [of things]}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 colla }{\i\f1 (pa.p. of #}{\b\i\f1 col- }{\i\f1 "bear, *wear") }{\f1 (borne). }{\i\f1 Also used as a noun = "vestment, cloak". -GYER, MR:385
\par   }{\f1 WORTH, WORTHY }{\b\f1 valda}{\f1  (dear) }{\i\f1 -GL:23
\par   }{\f1 WOSE }{\b\f1 R\'fa}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 R\'faatan }{\i\f1 (pl }{\b\i\f1 R\'faatani }{\i\f1 is given but seems perfectly regular)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 -UT:385
\par   }{\f1 WOUND }{\i\f1 (vb) }{\b\f1 harna}{\f1 -; WOUNDED }{\b\f1 harna}{\f1 ; WOUND }{\i\f1 (noun) }{\b\f1 harw\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -SKAR
\par   }{\f1 WRAP }{\b\f1 vaita- }{\i\f1 -LT1:271
\par   }{\f1 WRATH }{\b\f1 orm\'eb }{\f1 (haste, violence, rushing) }{\i\f1 -GOR, KHOR
\par   }{\f1 WREATHE}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 r\'eda}{\f1  (garland) -}{\i\f1 PM:347
\par   }{\f1 WRIGHT }{\b\f1 samno }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 )}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (carpenter, builder) }{\i\f1 -STAB
\par   }{\f1 WRITE #}{\b\f1 tec}{\f1 - (3rd pers. aorist }{\b\f1 tec\'eb}{\f1  is given); WRITING }{\b\f1 sarm\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (in the }{\f1 Etymologies }{\i\f1 also}{\f1  }{\b\i\f1 tengw\'eb}{\i\f1 
, but in a later source this word is said to mean "indication, sign, token", and this meaning may be predominant in Tolkien's later Quenya; pl }{\b\i\f1 tengwi }{\i\f1 is attested)}{\f1 ; WRITING SYSTEM }{\b\f1 tencel\'eb}{\f1  (spelling); WRITINGS }{
\b\f1 parma }{\f1 (book)  -}{\i\f1 VT39:8}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 TEK cf. WJ:394, 395, LT2:346
\par   }{\f1 WRONG }{\b\f1 raica }{\f1 (crooked, bent) }{\i\f1 -R\'c1YAK
\par   
\par }{\b\f1\fs24   <Y>}{\f1 
\par   YARD }{\b\f1 ranga }{\i\f1 (pl }{\b\i\f1 rangar }{\i\f1 is attested). The basic meaning of }{\b\i\f1 ranga }{\i\f1 was "full pace". This N\'famen\'f3rean linar measure was "slightly longer than our yard, approxi
mately 38 inches [= 96.5 cm]". -UT:285, 461
\par }{\f1   YAWN }{\b\f1 yanga-}{\f1 , #}{\b\f1 hac}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (only attested as participle: }{\b\i\f1 h\'e1cala }{\i\f1 "yawning") -YAG, MC:222
\par   }{\f1 YEAR }{\b\f1 loa}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (lit. "growth")}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 coranar }{\i\f1 (lit. "sun-round", used when the year was considered more or less astronomically - but }{\b\i\f1 loa }{\i\f1 is stated to be the more usual word for "year")}{\f1 
. "LONG-YEAR" }{\b\f1 y\'e9n }{\i\f1 (pl. }{\b\i\f1 y\'e9ni }{\i\f1 is attested in Nam, obsoleting Etym }{\b\i\f1 yeni}{\i\f1 
). A "long-year" is a period of 144 solar years, an Elvish "century" - the Eldar used duodecimal counting, in which 144 is the first three-digit number, like our 100. But sometimes it seems that }{\b\i\f1 y\'e9n }{\i\f1 
simply means "year". Cf the following words: }{\f1 LAST YEAR }{\b\f1 yenya}{\f1 , HAVING MANY YEARS }{\b\f1 linyenwa }{\f1 (old), *RECKONING OF YEARS }{\b\f1 Y\'e9non\'f3ti\'eb }{\i\f1 -LotR:1141, YEN, MR:51
\par   }{\f1 YELLOW }{\b\f1 malina}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tulca }{\i\f1 (the latter was adopted from Valarin and used in Vanyarin Quenya only)}{\f1 ,YELLOW POWDER }{\b\f1 malo }{\f1 (pollen), "YELLOW HAMMER" (yellow bird) }{\b\f1 ammal\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ambal\'eb}{
\f1 , YELLOW WATER-LILY }{\b\f1 n\'e9nu }{\i\f1 -SMAL, WJ:399, LT1:248
\par   }{\f1 YOKE }{\b\f1 yanta }{\f1 (bridge), }{\b\f1 yalt\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 -YAT, GL:37
\par   }{\f1 YONDER }{\i\f1 (adj) }{\b\f1 enta}{\f1 ; YONDER }{\i\f1 (interjection?)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 en }{\f1 (there, look!) }{\i\f1 -EN
\par   }{\f1 YOU }{\i\f1 (pl. only; for sg "you", see THOU) The ending -}{\b\i\f1 ly\'eb}{\i\f1  may cover pl. as well as sg. "you"; on the other hand, Tolkien also used -}{\b\i\f1 ll\'eb}{\i\f1  for pl. "you" (VT43:36)}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 The reduced form }{
\b\i\f1 -l }{\i\f1 may be attached to an imperative: }{\b\i\f1 hecal! }{\i\f1 "you be gone!" [WJ:364] and probably also as object: }{\b\i\f1 *Ut\'favienyel}{\i\f1 , "I (}{\b\i\f1 -nye}{\i\f1 ) have found you (}{\b\i\f1 -l}{\i\f1 )". Perhaps -}{\b\i\f1 l}{
\i\f1  can be used for plural "you" in subject postition as well, e.g. *}{\b\i\f1 lendel}{\i\f1 , "you went", though this could perhaps also be *}{\b\i\f1 lendell\'eb}{\i\f1 . The independent (emphatic) word for "you, even you" as subject may be *}{
\b\i\f1 ell\'eb}{\i\f1 , while object "you" seems to be }{\b\i\f1 le}{\i\f1  (perhaps also used as a polite or formal sg: "thee", though the sg. seems to be #}{\b\i\f1 lye}{\i\f1  in at least one late version of Quenya). }{\f1 YOUR \endash  }{\i\f1 
the ending would be -}{\b\i\f1 lya}{\i\f1  if -}{\b\i\f1 ly\'eb}{\i\f1  is both sg. and pl. "you" (the ending -}{\b\i\f1 lya}{\i\f1  is attested with sg. meaning), but if we accept -}{\b\i\f1 ll\'eb}{\i\f1 
 as an ending for plural "you", the ending for "your" would most likely be *-}{\b\i\f1 lla}{\i\f1 , e.g. *}{\b\i\f1 aldalla}{\i\f1  "your tree".}{\f1 
\par }{\i\f1   }{\f1 YOUNG }{\b\f1 nessa}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 vinya}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 cana}{\f1 ; YOUTH }{\b\f1 n\'e9s\'eb}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 ness\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 laito}{\f1 /}{\b\f1 laisi }{\f1 (vigour, new life); YOUTHFUL }{\b\f1 nessima }{\i\f1 
-NETH, LR:25, GL:37, LT1:267
\par 
\par }{\b\f1\fs24   <Z>
\par }{\f1   ZIMRAPHEL }{\b\f1 M\'edriel }{\i\f1 -UT:224, Silm:324
\par }{\f1   ZIMRATH\'d4N }{\b\f1 Hostamir }{\f1 -}{\i\f1 UT:222}{\f0 
\par }{\f1 
\par }}