{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff0\deflang1033\deflangfe1044{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f2\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 02070309020205020404}Courier New;}{\f3\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05050102010706020507}Symbol;}{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Times;}
{\f5\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Helvetica;}{\f6\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Courier;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Geneva;}
{\f8\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Tms Rmn;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Helv;}{\f10\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Serif;}
{\f11\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Sans Serif;}{\f12\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}New York;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}System;}
{\f14\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05000000000000000000}Wingdings;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604030504040204}Tahoma;}{\f16\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Marlett;}
{\f17\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Reference 1;}{\f18\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Reference 2;}{\f19\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05020603050405020304}Times New Roman Special G1;}
{\f20\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05020603050405020304}Times New Roman Special G2;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0506020202030204}Arial Narrow;}{\f22\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0a04020102020204}Arial Black;}
{\f23\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020404030301010803}Garamond;}{\f24\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02050604050505020204}Bookman Old Style;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0806030902050204}Impact;}
{\f26\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 050b0604020202020204}Arial Special G1;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 050b0604020202020204}Arial Special G2;}{\f28\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 050b0506020202030204}Arial Narrow Special G1;}
{\f29\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 050b0506020202030204}Arial Narrow Special G2;}{\f30\fscript\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 030f0702030302020204}Comic Sans MS;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604030504040204}Verdana{\*\falt arial};}
{\f32\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Angerthas;}{\f33\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Angerthas Moria;}{\f34\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0500000000000000}Tengwar Quenya;}
{\f35\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0500000000000000}Tengwar Sindarin;}{\f36\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0500000000000000}AngloSaxon Runes;}{\f37\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000400000000000000}Tengwar Parmaite;}
{\f38\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}GillSans;}{\f129\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Tahoma CE;}{\f130\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Tahoma Cyr;}{\f132\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Tahoma Greek;}{\f133\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Tahoma Tur;}
{\f134\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Tahoma Baltic;}{\f165\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial Narrow CE;}{\f166\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Narrow Cyr;}{\f168\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Narrow Greek;}{\f169\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Narrow Tur;}
{\f170\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Narrow Baltic;}{\f171\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial Black CE;}{\f172\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Black Cyr;}{\f174\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Black Greek;}{\f175\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Black Tur;}
{\f176\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Black Baltic;}{\f177\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Garamond CE;}{\f178\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Garamond Cyr;}{\f180\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Garamond Greek;}{\f181\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Garamond Tur;}
{\f182\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Garamond Baltic;}{\f183\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Bookman Old Style CE;}{\f184\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Bookman Old Style Cyr;}{\f186\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Bookman Old Style Greek;}
{\f187\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Bookman Old Style Tur;}{\f188\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Bookman Old Style Baltic;}{\f189\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Impact CE;}{\f190\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Impact Cyr;}{\f192\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Impact Greek;}
{\f193\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Impact Tur;}{\f194\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Impact Baltic;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}{\s15\sa120\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext15 Body Text;}{
\s16\li283\sa120\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext16 Body Text 2;}}{\info{\title One such effort has been made before: Nancy Martsch' Basic Quenya}{\author Helge K\'e5re Fauskanger}
{\operator Helge K\'e5re Fauskanger}{\creatim\yr2002\mo2\dy15\hr10}{\revtim\yr2002\mo3\dy13\hr21\min36}{\version3}{\edmins38}{\nofpages31}{\nofwords13963}{\nofchars79590}{\*\company  }{\nofcharsws97742}{\vern73}}
\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl1417\margr1417\margt1417\margb1417 \deftab708\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphhotz425\hyphcaps0\formshade\viewkind4\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot \fet0\sectd \linex0\headery709\footery709\colsx709\endnhere\sectdefaultcl 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid {\b\fs36\cf6\lang1033 
\par Introduction}{\cf6\lang1033 
\par }{\lang1033 
\par Of all the languages invented by British author and philologist J. R. R. Tolkien (1892-1973), the most popular has always been }{\i\lang1033 Quenya}{\lang1033 
. It also seems to be the most highly developed of all the languages Tolkien devised. Indeed only two of them \endash  Quenya and Sindarin \endash 
 are so complete that one can with some ease write substantial texts in them without resorting to massive invention of one's own. Until recently, Sindarin was poorly understood, and its complex phonology may daunt fresh students (e
specially if they have no linguistic training). My advice to people who want to study Tolkien's linguistic creations would definitely be that they start with Quenya. Knowing this tongue will facilitate later studies of the other languages, including Sinda
r
in, since Quenya represents just one branch of the Elvish language family: The Elvish languages are not "independent" entities, but all evolved from a common ancestral tongue, and in many respects, Quenya stands closer to this primitive original than the 
other languages.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
In reality as opposed to this fictional context, Tolkien knew well what kind of style he was aiming for, and having sketched a "primitive Elvish" language, he cleverly devised sound-shifts that would produce a tongue with the desired flavou
r: Quenya resulted from his youthful romance with }{\i\lang1033 Finnish}{\lang1033 ; he was, in his own words, "quite intoxicated" by the sound and style of this language when he discovered it (}{\i\lang1033 The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien}{\lang1033 
, p. 214). However, it should be emphasized that Finnish was an inspiration only; Quenya is in no way a garbled version of Finnish, and only a few words of its vocabulary display any semblance to the corresponding Finnish words. (See Harri Per\'e4
la's discussion at http://www.sci.fi/~alboin/finn_que.htm; the writer is a Finn himself.) Tolkien also mentioned Greek and Latin as inspirations; we can evidently add Spanish to the list as well. 
\par The fictional or "internal" history of Quenya is synopsized in my regular Ardalambion Quenya article (see http://www.uib.no/People
/hnohf/quenya.htm) and does not have to be repeated in any detail here. Very briefly, within Tolkien's mythos Quenya was the language of the Elves that dwelt in Valinor in the Uttermost West; being spoken in the Blessed Realm, it was the noblest tongue in
 
the world. Later one of the clans of the Elves, the Noldor, went into exile in Middle-earth, bringing the Quenya tongue with them. In Middle-earth it soon fell out of use as a daily speech, but among the Noldor it was ever preserved as a ceremonial langua
ge, and as such it was also known to Mortal Men in later ages. Hence in }{\i\lang1033 The Lord of the Rings}{\lang1033  we have Frodo delivering the famous Quenya greeting }{\b\lang1033 elen s\'edla l\'famenn' omentielvo}{\lang1033 
, "a star shines on the hour of our meeting", when he and his friends run into some
 Elves (and the Elves are delighted to meet "a scholar in the Ancient Tongue"). If one studies Quenya as a way to immerse oneself in Tolkien's fiction, it may indeed be best to picture oneself as a mortal student in Middle-earth in the Third Age, about th
e period covered in }{\i\lang1033 The Lord of the Rings}{\lang1033 . (Picturing oneself as an Elvish native speaker in Valinor back in the First Age may be overly ambitious.) The particular form of Quenya taught in this course is \endash  by intention 
\endash  precisely the "late Exilic" or "Third Age" variant. This is the kind of Quenya exemplified in }{\i\lang1033 The Lord of the Rings}{\lang1033 , with Galadriel's Lament (}{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 ) as the most substantial example.

\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab Numerous enthusiasts have brought forth a limited, but steadily growing body of Quenya literature, especial
ly since a substantial amount of vocabulary finally became available with the publication of }{\i\lang1033 The Lost Road}{\lang1033 
 in 1987, fifteen years after Tolkien's death. Thanks to this and the fifteen other books of Middle-earth material that Christopher Tolkien in the per
iod 1977-96 edited from the manuscripts his father had left behind, we now know very much more about Tolkien's languages than we ever did during the lifetime of their inventor. We certainly can't sit down and readily translate the works of Shakespeare int
o
 Quenya, but we do know a few thousand words and can infer the general outlines of the grammar Tolkien envisioned. Still, you cannot really become "fluent" in Quenya, not matter how hard you study what is presently available. But it is eminently possible 
t
o write quite long Quenya texts if one deliberately eschews the unfortunate gaps in our knowledge, and we can at least hope that some of these gaps (especially regarding grammatical features) will be filled in by future publications. In the future, we may
 be able to develop Quenya into a more fully "useable" language. But we must obviously start by carefully internalizing the information provided by Tolkien's own material, as far as it is available to us.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Many have wanted a regular "course" or "tutorial", with exercises and all, that would allow them to study Quenya on their own with some ease. One such effort has been made before: Nancy Martsch' }
{\i\lang1033 Basic Quenya}{\lang1033 . All in all, this was certainly a good work; the fact that material that has been published after it
 was written now reveals certain shortcomings, cannot be held against the author. However, many would like to have a more updated course, and I have repeatedly been approached by people suggesting that I would be the right person to write it. It is of cou
r
se nice when others call me an "expert" on Tolkienian linguistics; actually I would say that it is difficult to be an "expert" in these matters, due to the scarcity of source material. Nonetheless, I have been so privileged that I have been able to spend 
m
uch time studying these matters (starting more than ten years ago), and I see it as my duty to record and pass on whatever insights I may have gained. Hence in the end I sat down and started writing this course, intended for beginners. (This conveniently 
allows me to fill the uncritical, vulnerable minds of fresh students with }{\i\lang1033 my}{\lang1033 
 interpretation of Quenya grammar, which interpretation I inevitably hold to be the best and most accurate. Ha ha ha.) However, this course does not seek to imitate a Linguaphone-li
ke format with long dialogues etc. to help the student to acquire "basic fluency" in various situations relating to everyday life. This would be quite pointless in the case of an "art-language" like Quenya, which is to be used for carefully prepared prose
 
and poetry rather than casual chatting. Rather these lessons take the form of a series of essays on various parts of Quenya grammar, reviewing and analyzing available evidence in an attempt to reconstruct Tolkien's intentions, with some exercises appended
.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab 
Why study Quenya? Obviously not because you are going to Valinor on holiday and need to be able to communicate with the natives. Some may want to study this language to somehow get in better accord with the spirit of Tolkien's authorship. He referred to

\par 
\par }\pard \li705\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 ...what I think is a primary 'fact' about my work, that it is all of a piece, and }{\i\lang1033 fundamentally linguistic}{\lang1033 
 in inspiration. [...] It is not a 'hobby', in the sense of something quite different from one's work, taken up as a relief-outlet. The invention of 
languages is the foundation. The 'stories' were made rather to provide a world for the languages than the reverse. To me a name comes first and the story follows. I should have preferred to write in 'Elvish'. But, of course, such a work as }{\i\lang1033 
The Lord of the Rings}{\lang1033 
 has been edited and only as much 'language' has been left in as I thought would be stomached by readers. (I now find that many would have liked more.) [...] It is to me, anyway, largely an essay in 'linguistic aesthetic', as I sometimes say to people
 who ask me 'what is it all about'. (}{\i\lang1033 The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien}{\lang1033 , pp. 219-220)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par In light of such strong statements made by the author, studying his invented languages cannot be dismissed as some kind of silly escapism for romantic teenagers. It must be c
onsidered a crucial part of scholarship relating to Tolkien's authorship, or indeed his work in general: The languages constructed by Tolkien are part of his output as a philologist, not necessarily less serious than his writings on pre-existing languages
 
like Anglo-Saxon; notice that he refused to call his "fundamentally linguistic" work a mere hobby. One may call Quenya and the other languages works of art, but no matter what word we use to describe them, in the end it all boils down to this: Tolkien was
 not just a descriptive linguist, passively exploring and contemplating pre-existing tongues \endash  he was a }{\i\lang1033 creative}{\lang1033  linguist as well.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Obviously fluency in Quenya or Sindarin is not a prerequisite before you can say anything intelligent about Tolkien's narrativ
es; yet it is clear that some critics and scholars have woefully underestimated the crucial role of the invented languages, finding themselves unable to take even very clear statements like the one quoted above wholly seriously. To fully appreciate the sc
ope and intricacy of Tolkien's linguistic sub-creation one has to actively study it for its own sake. It should certainly be able to command interest for its own sake. }{\lang1033\cgrid0 
Some years ago, recognized Tolkien scholar Tom Shippey observed that 
\par 
\par }\pard \li708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033\cgrid0 ...it's clear that
 the languages Tolkien created are created by, you know, one of the most accomplished philologists of all time, so there is therefore something interesting in them, and I think also in them there is poured much of his professional knowledge and thought. (
.
..) I've often noticed that there are really very valuable observations about what Tolkien thought about real philology buried in the fiction. And I would not be at all surprised if, you know, there were valuable observations buried in the invented langua
ges. So there may be, in fact, something which emerges from it. }{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 [From an interview conducted during the Arda symposium in Oslo, April 3-5 1987, published in the journal }{\i\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 Angerthas}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 
, issue 31.]}{\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par Even if one does not believe that there are great new philologica
l insights waiting to be unearthed from the structure of Tolkien's languages, I cannot see why conducting detailed studies of these languages should necessarily be seen as escapism, or at best a somewhat silly pastime for people who are too lazy to find s
o
mething better to do. The languages constructed by Tolkien have been likened to music; his biographer Humphrey Carpenter observes that "if he had been interested in music he would very likely have wanted to compose melodies; so why should he not make up a
 
personal system of words that would be as it were a private symphony?" One may study one of the languages Tolkien  painstakingly developed as one may study a musical symphony: a complex work of many interrelated parts woven into intricate beauty. Yet the 
s
ymphony is fixed in its form, while a language can be infinitely recombined into ever new texts of prose and poetry, and yet retain its nature and flavour undiminished. One of the attractions of Quenya is that we can compose linguistic "music" ourselves j
ust by applying Tolkien's rules, so Carpenter's comparison is too limited: Tolkien did not just make a symphony, he invented an entire form of music, and it would be a pity if it were to die with him.
\par  \tab Of course, others may want to study Quenya to immerse themselves in Tolkien's fiction, with no pretensions of "scholarship" of any kind: Tolkien's vision of the }{\i\lang1033 Elves}{\lang1033 
 (Quendi, Eldar) is no doubt the main achievement of his authorship, and Quenya was \endash  at least in the somewhat biased opinion of the Noldor \endash  "t
he chief Elvish tongue, the noblest, and the one most nearly preserving the ancient character of Elvish speech" (}{\i\lang1033 The War of the Jewels}{\lang1033 
 p. 374). But one may grope towards "Elvishness" in a deeper sense than just trying to immerse oneself in fiction. Happily
 abandoning the all too classical idea of Elves as tiny, overly pretty "fairies", Tolkien instead achieved the vision of Elves as something more: "I suppose that the }{\i\lang1033 Quendi}{\lang1033 
 are in fact in these histories very little akin to the Elves and Fairies of Europe; and if I were pressed to rationalize, I should say that they represent greater beauty and longer life, and nobility \endash  the Elder Children" (}{\i\lang1033 
The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien}{\lang1033 , p. 176). The quintessence of Tolkien's vision of "Elvishness" is contained primarily in the languages, "for to the Eldar the making of speech is the oldest of the arts and the most beloved" (}{\i\lang1033 
The Peoples of Middle-earth}{\lang1033  p. 398). In a way, the study of Quenya can be a quest for this vision of something beautiful and noble beyond the normal c
apability of our mortal and finite selves: "The Elves represent, as it were, the artistic, aesthetic, and purely scientific aspects of the Humane raised to a higher level than is actually seen in Men" (}{\i\lang1033 Letters}{\lang1033 
, p. 176). The seeking for such a "higher level" transcends all fiction. Tolkien's inner vision of this level he translated partly into pictures, much more prominently into narratives, but (to him) more importantly still, into the words and sounds of }{
\i\lang1033 language}{\lang1033 . In Quenya his vision of Beauty lives on, awaiting those capable of comprehending and appreciating it.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 On their web-pages, the Swedish Tolkien-linguists of the Mellonath Daeron group try to justify their study of Tolkien's languages: 
\par 
\par }\pard \li708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Our activity has been described as the ultimate luxury. We stud
y something that does not exist, just for fun. This is something you can afford when you have everything else; food, shelter, clothes, friends, and so on. The Tolkien languages are well worth studying for their high aesthetic values alone. And knowledge o
f the languages is a key to a fuller appreciation of the beauty of Tolkien's sub-creation, his world, Arda.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par I heartily agree with the last two sentences, but I cannot agree that Quenya or Sindarin "does not exist". Obviously we are not talking about physic
al, tangible objects, but that goes for any language. These are not fictional languages, but languages as real as Esperanto or any other constructed language. Tolkien himself noted about his languages that they "have some existence, since I have composed 
them in some completeness" (}{\i\lang1033 The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien}{\lang1033 , p. 175). 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Unlike Esperanto, Quenya is however strongly associated with a }{\i\lang1033 fictional internal history}{\lang1033 
. (Tolkien once stated that Esperanto had been more successful if there had been an Esperanto mytho
s to go with it!) The associated mythos certainly enriches Quenya and helps us to understand what kind of linguistic "flavour" Tolkien was aiming for, and the fact that this language has a role to play in the most famous fantasy novels ever written obviou
s
ly provides it with much "free publicity" that Esperanto can only dream of. Yet it must be emphasized that Quenya does exist as an actual entity in our own world, and as mentioned above, it indeed has a steadily growing literature, mostly in verse: The te
x
ts presently in existence must already be hundreds of times more comprehensive than all the Quenya texts Tolkien ever wrote himself. He endlessly refined the structure and imaginary evolution of his invented languages, but he wrote remarkably few substant
ial texts in them. Though he stated that he "should have preferred to write in 'Elvish'" (see quote above), he actually wrote }{\i\lang1033 about}{\lang1033 
 the "Elvish" tongues rather than in them. "Delight lay in the creation itself," Christopher Tolkien observes (}{\i\lang1033 Sauron Defeated}{\lang1033 
, p. 440). His father made the languages just because he loved making them, not because he needed to "use" them for any specific purpose. To be sure, Tolkien wrote a number of poems in "Elvish", but they amount to very little compared to the thousands of 
pages he wrote }{\i\lang1033 about}{\lang1033  the structure of his languages.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab 
Tolkien had his fun in sheer invention; that was his privilege as the original creator. However, I daresay quite few people are capable of deriving much pleasure from mere passive contemplation of the st
ructure of a language, or from reading the grammar of an invented language as if it were some kind of novel. I imagine that most people who want to study Quenya have some intention, however vague, of putting this knowledge to use by writing Quenya texts t
hemselves, or at least by reading other people's texts (at the }{\i\lang1033 very}{\lang1033 
 least Tolkien's own). Really learning any language in any case requires active participation: Even if you wouldn't dream of ever publishing anything in Quenya but rather want to assess Tolk
ien's "Elvish" for purely academic purposes, you will still have to work yourselves through some exercises to internalize grammar and vocabulary. Such exercises are provided in this course.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 My favorite angle on the study of Tolkien's languages is probably 
this (building on the "musical" analogy suggested by Carpenter): I'd say we are in somewhat the same situation as if a genius composer were to invent a new form of music, writing a great deal about its structure, but making relatively few actual compositi
ons \endash  some of them not even published during the lifetime of the composer himself. Yet these few compositions gain a steadily growing international audience, an audience that would very much like to hear more \endash  much more \endash 
 music of this kind. The original c
omposer being dead, what are we to do? There is only one way to go: We must carry out a thorough study of both the published compositions and the more theoretical writings, to make out and internalize the rules and principles for this kind of music. Then 
we can start to compose ourselves, making entirely new melodies that yet comply with the general structure devised by the original inventor. 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab This, of course, has a rough analogy when it comes to Tolkien's narratives as well. Tolkien's themes and principle
s of story-telling have been taken over by generations of new authors, resulting in the modern fantasy genre \endash 
 though it would not be very controversial to say that far from all authors have been able to live up to the high standards set by the master. In 
somewhat the same manner, the quality of the numerous post-Tolkien Quenya texts varies greatly. In the case of some early attempts, written when very little source material was available, it is now easy to spot various shortcomings and misinterpretations 
of what Tolkien really intended. Today, with much more material available, I would say it is possible to write texts that Tolkien }{\i\lang1033 probably}{\lang1033 
 would have recognized as at least roughly correct Quenya (though I think reading Quenya texts not originating with himself would have been a strange experience for him; his invented languages were originally something very private).
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 This course should in any case be useful no matter what your angle on this study may be \endash  whether you want to learn Quenya to immerse yoursel
f in Tolkien's fiction, to better appreciate a crucial side of his authorship, to learn about the intricate creations of a talented linguist, to accept the intellectual challenge of trying to master a sophisticated system, to go on a meditative quest for 
"Elvishness", or simply to enjoy Quenya aesthetically. None of these are mutually exclusive, of course. Whatever your angle is, I hope you would like to have a part in making Quenya literature grow and flourish.
\par Another Tolkien quote may be in place here: "No language is justly studied merely as an aid to other purposes. It will in fact better serve other purposes, philological or historical, when it is studied for love, for itself" (MC:189).
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang1033 THE QUESTION OF COPYRIGHT}{\cf2\lang1033 
\par }{\lang1033 This is an issue I shall have to devote
 quite a few paragraphs to, though this will probably surprise any fresh, innocent student who has never given much thought to this at all. However, debates revolving around copyright issues have sadly caused a great deal of bitterness among students work
i
ng in the field of Tolkien-linguistics; such debates essentially blew apart the TolkLang mailing list, leading to the establishing of Elfling instead. If Tolkien's heirs or their lawyers ever read what follows, I hope they are not offended. This really is
 
not about stealing anything from them, but about directing attention to one highly important part of Tolkien's work and help people learning about it, so that it can live and grow and stand as a lasting testimony to his efforts, and as a dynamic memorial 
t
o himself. Talking about his father, Christopher Tolkien in a TV interview described Quenya as "language as he wanted it, the language of his heart". Students of Quenya merely want this special part of Tolkien's heart to live on. Nobody is trying to make 
any money or otherwise profit from this. (If the Tolkien Estate, or rather HarperCollins, might ever want to publish this course in book form, I would be happy to let them do so, and I would not expect to receive any royalties.)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 In 1998 and early 1999, on t
he TolkLang list, lawyer W. C. Hicklin vociferously argued that publishing "unauthorized" grammatical descriptions of a Tolkien-language would be a blatant violation of the copyright of the Tolkien Estate, asserting that any such publication would undoubt
e
dly make the Estate react with "money, guns and lawyers". (One hopes the part about firearms was a figure of speech.) I cannot agree with such an interpretation of copyright law, especially considering that what we know about Quenya we have for the most p
art learnt by studying the examples we have \endash  not by reading Tolkien's explicit grammars, that still have not been published. I cannot imagine that when studying available Quenya texts, is it }{\i\lang1033 illegal}{\lang1033 
 for us to put our conclusions into words and tell others 
about them. If this is what copyright means, then all sorts of scholarly commentary and literary criticism immediately go down the drain. While Hicklin said he reported the position of Christopher Tolkien (whom he claimed to know on a first-name basis), t
h
e Tolkien Estate itself has so far declined to present its opinion on these issues, even when asked to do so by TolkLang moderator Julian Bradfield. It may be noted that copyright law is not the area Mr. Hicklin specializes in, and I think he pressed the 
c
oncept of "character" rather far by asserting that every individual word in the invented languages must be considered a literary character of Tolkien's, apparently on par with such characters as Aragorn or Galadriel. Mysteriously, Hicklin still agreed tha
t it is OK to write fresh texts in Tolkien's languages, though in Hicklin's world this would seem to be the analogy of writing new stories involving Tolkien's characters (which everybody agrees would be a copyright violation).
\par Hicklin's obvious problems in 
putting together a consistent argument, as well as subsequent legal inquiries conducted by myself and others, have led me to the conclusion that copyrighting a language as such would be quite impossible. The language "itself" is not to be likened to a fix
ed text in or about it; it is an entirely abstract system, and for anything to enjoy copyright protection it must first of all have a fixed form to }{\i\lang1033 be}{\lang1033 
 protected. Arguing that the very grammatical structure and vocabulary of the language is its "fixed form" is no use, for this is an abstract }{\i\lang1033 system}{\lang1033 
, not a "form". Any actual text about (or in) a language is indeed protected, but not the language "itself". To return to the analogy of our genius composer who invents a new form of music: His copyright to his own 
compositions, and to his writings on this form of music }{\i\lang1033 as fixed texts}{\lang1033 
, cannot and should not be disputed by anyone. But he or his heirs cannot well assert that publishing entirely new compositions, or wholly original descriptions of the principles of this kind of music, would somehow violate their copyright.
\par This course is written and published (for free on the Internet) by me as a private person. The Tolkien Estate has not been asked to endorse it or even comment on it, it is in no way "official", and I m
ust take full responsibility for the quality of the contents. No disrespect is intended when I point out that any endorsement by the Estate would not have meant much in the way of a quality guarantee, since certain earlier works on Quenya that }{
\i\lang1033 were}{\lang1033  publish
ed with explicit permission from the Estate can now be seen to contain certain obvious shortcomings and misinterpretations. There is little reason to believe that Estate lawyers or Christopher Tolkien himself are capable of judging the quality of a Quenya
 
grammar (and likewise no reason to hold this against them; learning Quenya from the primary sources is a long and challenging study reserved for the especially interested). In such a situation I hope and believe that the Tolkien Estate respects the right 
of scholars to carry on their studies undisturbed, and to present the results of such research \endash 
 especially when the relevant publications are entirely non-commercial. Despite the strong claims made by Hicklin and a very few others, there is presently no co
ncrete evidence that the Estate or Christopher Tolkien see such studies as a violation of their copyright. If they do, let them contact me and we will talk.
\par The interpretation of Quenya grammar that it here set out is based on a study of the available sour
ces, mostly analysis of actual Quenya text, and on exegesis of the relatively few explicit notes on grammar that are presently available. I hold it to be obvious that this is primarily a work of analysis and commentary (presented in a didactic fashion), a
nd in terms of copyright, discussing the structure of Quenya cannot be much different from discussing (say) the plot structure of }{\i\lang1033 The Lord of the Rings}{\lang1033 
: In either case it is clear that anything I can say must ultimately be based on Tolkien's writings, but t
he resulting study still is not a "derived work" in terms of copyright law. What we are doing here is not retelling Tolkien's fiction (though I will certainly }{\i\lang1033 refer}{\lang1033  to it \endash 
 but then from the perspective of a critic, or better commentator, to demonstrate ho
w Tolkien's fiction and language-construction interlock). Primarily we will be studying one of Tolkien's languages as an actual rather than a fictitious entity. The fact that this language was first presented to the world in a context of fiction does not 
make it a "fictional language", and use or discussion of it is not necessarily "derivative fiction". As already mentioned, Tolkien himself observed that his languages as such "have some existence" simply because he had actually devised them \endash 
 they do not exclusively reside within a fictitious context (}{\i\lang1033 The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien}{\lang1033 , p. 175).
\par Much of Quenya vocabulary is not wholly "original"; Tolkien readily admitted that the vocabularies of his "Elvish" languages were "inevitably full of...reminiscences" of pre-existing tongues (}{\i\lang1033 The Peoples of Middle-earth}{\lang1033 
 p. 368). Though usually not so obvious that it is disturbing to those who want to study Quenya as a highly exotic language, the fact remains that the knowledgeable easily discern Indo-European (and sometime
s even Semitic) words and stems underlying many of Tolkien's "invented" words. This is not to be seen as some sort of failure of imagination on Tolkien's part; he noted that "it is impossible in constructing imaginary languages from a limited number o
f component sounds to avoid such resemblances" \endash  adding that he did not even try to avoid them (}{\i\lang1033 Letters}{\lang1033 
, pp. 384-385). Even where no plausible "real-world" inspiration for a Quenya word can be cited, the fact still remains that there is no legal tradition whats
oever to allow a person coining new words to somehow claim them as his personal property. Tolkien himself was aware that names cannot be copyrighted (}{\i\lang1033 Letters}{\lang1033 
, p. 349), and then one cannot well copyright common nouns, verbs, adjectives or prepositions either, precluding "unauthorized" use of them. Some words in common use today, such as }{\i\lang1033 robot}{\lang1033 
, first occurred in a context of fiction. One cannot therefore claim that they are "fictional" words, protected on par with fictional characters, and not to be used, lis
ted or explained without explicit permission from the one who first coined them (or his heirs).
\par Legal inquiries conducted after Hicklin made his flamboyant claims have confirmed that }{\i\lang1033 words}{\lang1033  as such automatically enter public domain the second they are coine
d, and nobody can monopolize them or claim exclusive ownership to them. You can register a word as a }{\i\lang1033 trademark}{\lang1033 
, of course, but that is something entirely different: Apple Computers can't stop anyone from using "apple" as an everyday word. It is also irrele
vant that the manufacturer of some kind of fantasy game had to remove all references to "balrogs", for here it is not the Sindarin word }{\i\lang1033 balrog}{\lang1033 
, but balrogs as characters that lie in Tolkien's copyright. The fact that Tolkien coined the word }{\b\lang1033 alda}{\lang1033  for "tree"
 hardly implies that trees are his literary characters. It is not just a tree growing in Middle-earth that can be termed an }{\b\lang1033 alda}{\lang1033 ; the word works just as well if I write a Quenya poem about a tree growing outside my house.
\par I agree, though, that Quenya and the other languages enjoy some protection }{\i\lang1033 in their capacity as parts of the Middle-earth setting}{\lang1033 
. If anyone were to write new fantasy stories involving Elves speaking a language called Quenya, and there were samples demonstrating that this is indeed Tolkien
's Quenya, this would obviously be the same kind of plagiarism as if any fantasy writer were to "borrow" a city called Minas Tirith, and the description in the book made it clear that this city happened to be built on several levels and was overlooked by 
a white tower. But again: this course is most certainly not intended as derivative fiction. This is about studying and using one of Tolkien's languages largely irrespective of the fictional context as such \endash 
 though since I also aspire to present Quenya as a
 part of Tolkien's authorship, I shall of course have to mention, refer to and sometimes even quote the narratives as well as presenting mere technicalities. Nonetheless: It is obviously untrue that Tolkien's languages cannot in any way be separated from 
his fictional world (as Hicklin seemed to claim). Vicente Velasco was for instance able to write a Quenya poem (}{\i\lang1033 R\'edanna}{\lang1033 
) commemorating Princess Diana after her tragic death, but this does not imply that the accident where she was killed must actually be a pl
ot point in a Tolkien novel. Indeed Tolkien himself made a Quenya translation of the Lord's Prayer, a text that obviously belongs to our own reality and could not occur within the Middle-earth setting.
\par When discussing copyright issues, we must distinguish very clearly between the fictional context and }{\i\lang1033 actual use}{\lang1033 
 of systems or ideas described within this fiction; the latter is quite irrelevant for a discussion of copyright. By way of comparison: I fully agree that if anyone were to write new fantasy stories 
involving a race of small people with hairy feet living in underground structures called smials, then this writer would clearly plagiarize Tolkien and possibly even violate his copyright. But I cannot imagine that I violate anyone's copyright if I dig out
 a smial in my garden \endash  or for that matter, if I have a head-to-feet hair transplant. Similarly, one shouldn't feel free to write fantasy stories about Elves speaking Quenya, but }{\i\lang1033 actually using}{\lang1033 
 the linguistic structures dreamed up by Tolkien to write new texts that by their contents have nothing to do with his fiction cannot be a violation of copyright. The new Quenya texts are copyright to no one but their writers.
\par Happily, Tolkien's heirs seem to agree to this; at least they have never tried to stop anyone
 from publishing their Quenya poems. If the Estate has no problems with this, I can only assume that their lawyers also agree that it is perfectly legal for anyone to write Quenya grammars or compile Quenya wordlists. Otherwise we should be left with the 
rather absurd notion of a language that can be }{\i\lang1033 used}{\lang1033 , but not }{\i\lang1033 taught}{\lang1033  or in a scholarly way }{\i\lang1033 described}{\lang1033 
. I cannot imagine that the Estate would assert that the by now quite large number of Quenya texts that are not written by Tolkien and have nothing to do with
 his fiction cannot be subjected to grammatical or lexicographical studies simply because they happen to be written in Quenya. This would be an attempt to block and veto certain kinds of scholarship relating to an entire body of literature, and I don't th
ink this could be sustained, legally or even morally. I don't know that Tolkien's heirs disagree.
\par I have no intention, however, of disputing the Estate's copyright to Tolkien's }{\i\lang1033 actual writings}{\lang1033  (on the languages or otherwise), and though it is an interesting
 exercise to "reconstruct the Elvish original" supposedly underlying some of Tolkien's poems or stories, one should not publish "Elvish" translations of a great amount of continuous Tolkien text. All of his texts lie in the copyright of the Tolkien Estate
 
until it expires in 2023 (or was it 2048?), and publishing substantial translations or close retellings thereof would require the permission of the Estate: No matter how exceedingly esoteric the target-language is, any translation is still directly derive
d from Tolkien's own, copyrighted text. Neither should one write long stories set in Tolkien's world; that would be a violation of copyright no matter what language you use. However, making translations of a }{\i\lang1033 limited}{\lang1033 
 amount of Tolkien text can probably pass 
as fair use (but please don't publish your own Quenya rendering of the Ring Poem; there are all too many competing versions already...) Neither is there much reason to believe that the Estate would take any action against }{\i\lang1033 short}{\lang1033 
 Quenya-language novelettes e
ven if they do seem to be set in Middle-earth, since it should be obvious that the real purpose is to demonstrate the use of Quenya, not to write new stories to compete with Tolkien's own (I wouldn't publish even such novelettes in any way that could conc
eivably be seen as commercial publishing, though). Poems }{\i\lang1033 about}{\lang1033  persons or events in Tolkien's world (like Ales Bican's }{\i\lang1033 Roccalassen}{\lang1033  or "Song to \'c9
owyn") I think can pass as a branch of commentary or synopsis, as long as you don't include any fresh fiction of your own. But please don't push even that too far; Tolkien's heirs are in their good right when they assert their copyright to his stories.

\par In exercises made for this course, I have in any case deliberately avoided any direct references to persons, places or events in Tolkien's fictional world (except for }{\i\lang1033 one}{\lang1033 
 reference to the Two Trees because the Quenya word provides such a good example of dual number). Instead of referring to Tolkien's fiction I have in most cases resorted to a wholly generic fantasy world or medieval world; there is nothing to }{
\i\lang1033 preclude}{\lang1033  the possibility that this is Tolkien's world, but nothing concrete to confirm it, either. There are lots of Elves and Dwarves in these exercises, but though we inevitably use words like }{\i\lang1033 Eldar}{\lang1033  and 
}{\i\lang1033 Naucor}{\lang1033  for
 these peoples when talking about them in Quenya, they are really just "generic" Elves and Dwarves. Feel free to imagine that these "Elves" are Tolkien's Eldar if you like, but there is nothing that definitely ties them to any specific mythos.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx7797\adjustright {\lang1033 Despite the fact that I don't think the Tolkien Estate could }{\i\lang1033 legally}{\lang1033 
 stop people from doing pretty much what they want with Quenya as an actual language (separated from Tolkien's fiction), I urge students to use whatever knowledge they may obtain in a respectful way. 
We should feel some kind of moral obligation, or even gratitude, towards Tolkien as the creator of this language. Quenya as we know it is the result of decades of painstaking work and endless refinement; its creator intended it to have an august or even s
a
cred flavour, and it is not to be used for unworthy or downright silly purposes. (Please don't publish your Quenya compositions on toilet walls, for instance.) There is an old TV interview where Tolkien says he would not necessarily mind others knowing an
d enjoying his invented languages, but he would }{\i\lang1033 not}{\lang1033 
 like to see any of them turned into some sort of "secret" lingo used to exclude others. This is a wish I urge any and all students to respect. As a student and user of Quenya one should also be committed t
o preserving the integrity of Tolkien's system, taking great care not to distort it or needlessly dilute it. Occasionally we have to coin new words, but in such cases one should eschew arbitrary invention and instead work from Tolkien's own stems, using h
is methods of derivation.
\par Wrote Tolkien, "Of course the L[ord of the] R[ings] does not belong to me. It has been brought forth and must now go its appointed way in the world, though naturally I take a deep interest in its fortunes, as a parent would of a ch
ild. I am comforted to know that it has good friends to defend it" (}{\i\lang1033 The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien}{\lang1033 
, p. 413-14). Perhaps he would have felt the same way about the invented languages exemplified in the book he is talking about: They have been brought forth and do already go their "way in the world", studied and even used by many \endash 
 but now Quenya and the other languages must live their lives independently of their "parent", for he is no longer among us. So let students and users be their "good friends" and "def
end" their systems, true to the vision of the man who spent a lifetime developing them. And this brings us back to the structure of Quenya itself.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang1033 WHAT IS QUENYA LIKE?
\par }{\lang1033 What kind of language is this, structurally speaking? It seems that Finnish provided considerable inspiration not only for the sound-patterns, but for the basic structure as well. Tolkien described Quenya as a "highly inflected language" (}{
\i\lang1033 The Road Goes Ever On}{\lang1033  p. 69). That is, words appear in many different forms depending on their precise function in any given grammatical context. The differing forms are for the most part constructed by employing a plethora of }{
\i\lang1033 endings}{\lang1033 , endings with meanings that in English would often be expressed as separate words instead. Hence an English translation of a Quenya text will normally consist of more words than the Quenya original: In }{\i\lang1033 
Unfinished Tales}{\lang1033  p. 22, 51, we learn that three words of Quenya may well require a seven-word English translation: }{\b\lang1033 Anar caluva tielyanna}{\lang1033  = "the sun shall shine upon your path". So
me may see this as evidence that Quenya is a more efficient language than English, but whether one uses one long word or several shorter words to express a given meaning is not very crucial. (It may be noted that if one counts }{\i\lang1033 syllables}{
\lang1033  instead of words, i
t is suddenly English that is the most "efficient" language in the example above: The English text has one syllable less than the Quenya version!) Quenya should be enjoyed for its own qualities, not by comparing it to other languages. But the word }{
\b\lang1033 tielyanna }{\lang1033 "upon your path" illustrates the main difference between English and Quenya: small independent words like "your" or "upon" frequently become endings instead \endash  in this example -}{\b\lang1033 lya}{\lang1033  and -}{
\b\lang1033 nna}{\lang1033 , respectively.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Is Quenya a "difficult" language? Speaking of Quenya and Sindarin, the two main languages of his mythos, Tolkien wrote that "both languages are, of course, extremely difficult" (}{\i\lang1033 
Letters}{\lang1033 :403). Undoubtedly there are many presently unsuspected complexities waiting for us in the vast amount of unpublished mat
erial. But as far or short as our knowledge goes today, I certainly wouldn't call Quenya "extremely difficult". It may be an involved and intricate construct, but certainly less complicated than Sindarin, and the acquisition of Quenya as we know it is in 
n
o way a superhuman feat. Any devoted student should be able to achieve basic mastery of the grammatical system in relatively short time, weeks or even days rather than months. General knowledge about linguistics would certainly be helpful in such a study,
 
but hardly a prerequisite; in this course I have tried to make the explanations so simple that any reasonably bright teenager should be able to understand what is going on. (Bearing in mind that some people who want to study Quenya are quite young, I have
 tried to pre-suppose virtually no knowledge about linguistics, and I will explain even elementary linguistic terms \endash  more knowledgeable students may feel that I sometimes go into boring baby-talk.)
\par It must still be understood that it is not a streamlined Esperanto we are dealing with here. Tolkien deliberately tried to make his languages "naturalistic"; hence there are }{\i\lang1033 some}{\lang1033 
 irregular verbs and the like, though I would say their number is quite manageable. Quenya probably stands about midway between an absol
utely regular "Esperanto" and a typical "real" language with its spate of complexities and irregularities, yet perhaps closer to the former. Indeed Quenya is probably too simple to be entirely "credible" as a supposedly non-constructed language, at least 
i
f we compare it to the messy languages of Mortal Men in our own age. But then Quenya wasn't really "non-constructed" within the scope of the fictional history either; it was constructed and refined by the Elves, "and the Eldar know their tongue, not word 
by word only, but as a whole" (}{\i\lang1033 The Peoples of Middle-earth}{\lang1033 
 p. 398). So perhaps the Eldar, being very much conscious of the structure of their speech, would tend to make languages with a relatively tidy grammar. Anyway, from the viewpoint of students it is d
ifficult to regret the absence of more irregular forms to be memorized, so if this simplicity does indeed make Quenya less "credible" as a natural language, Tolkien is easily forgiven!
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang1033 THE SOURCES
\par }{\lang1033 We know that Tolkien wrote literally thousands of pages about his languages. Unfortunately \endash  and here I must ask fresh students to brazen themselves for their first big shock, though the shocking fact has already been alluded to 
\endash  }{\i\lang1033 very little of this material is available to us}{\lang1033 . However, Christopher Tolkien has a
pparently tried to make arrangements for its publication. Throughout most of the nineties, he was sending photo-copies of his father's linguistic manuscripts to a group of Americans often (but unofficially) referred to as the }{\i\lang1033 Elfconners}{
\lang1033 , apparently because
 of their prominence on the "cons" or conventions of ELF, the "Elvish Linguistic Fellowship". However, the most outspoken member of the group seems to have convinced himself beyond refutation that the term "Elfconners" was always meant to be derogatory, a
s
sociating it with "conning" or deception. As pointed out by TolkLang moderator Julian Bradfield, it may be that this member of the group is inventing insults against himself, but currently it is politically correct to refer to this group simply as the Edi
t
orial Team, abbreviated ET. Whatever we call them, the group consists of Christopher Gilson, Carl F. Hostetter, Patrick Wynne and Arden R. Smith (in recent years, Bill Welden has also joined in). Before they started to receive Tolkien manuscripts, these p
eople quite regularly published the Tolkien-linguistic journals }{\i\lang1033 Vinyar Tengwar}{\lang1033  (edited by Hostetter) and }{\i\lang1033 Parma Eldalamberon}{\lang1033 
 (edited by Gilson), generally maintaining a high standard. This, we must assume, was the reason why Christopher Tolkien wanted them to publish his father's linguistic manuscripts in the first place.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 The very strange and most unfortunate fact is that after they started receiving Tolkien manuscripts for publication, the group's rate of publication dropped disastrously. They began to recei
ve manuscript copies in 1991; a decade later they have managed to get a few hundred pages of new material into print (most of it wordlist material pertaining to the very earliest stages of Tolkien's work, far removed from the LotR scenario). Some of us ar
e
 not impressed. What little material has appeared has been nicely presented, but with the present rate of publication, the completion of the project must be very far off indeed. In 1996, Christopher Gilson stated that "next year", his group planned to pub
lish "fairly comprehensive" grammars for the two main languages of Tolkien's mythos. In early }{\i\lang1033 2002}{\lang1033 
 they finally published some material relating to certain stages of "Gnomish", an early conceptual ancestor of the language Tolkien later called Sindarin; we a
re still waiting for a really substantial amount of material about Quenya. Most other deadlines that the members of Gilson's group have set for themselves has proved equally worthless, and since about 1998 they have largely refrained from stating any dead
lines at all. Still, we must hope that in ten (or twenty, or thirty...) years, we will know more \endash  but if the Editorial Team is able to ever commence efficient, regular publication of Tolkien's material, they have yet to demonstrate this ability.

\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab We must work, then, from sources already available \endash 
 sources that often touch on the languages more or less incidentally. The linguistic aspect of Tolkien's authorship luckily permeates his works to such an extent that if you bring together all the scattered pieces
 of information and analyze them thoroughly, you will be able to figure out much about his languages even without access to his explicit grammars. Unfortunately this method of study will leave many gaps in our knowledge, gaps most irritating to people who
 try to actually }{\i\lang1033 use}{\lang1033 
 these languages. In other cases, the material is so scarce that we can formulate not just one but all too many theories about what the underlying grammatical rules look like, and we don't have any further examples that would allow us to
 identify the correct theory. Nonetheless, we do know a great deal about Quenya, though some of our knowledge is more tentative than we would like. A survey of the sources is in place here; at least I should explain the abbreviations used in this work.

\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 The primary narrative works, }{\i\lang1033 The Lord of the Rings}{\lang1033  (LotR, 1954-55) and }{\i\lang1033 The Silmarillion}{\lang1033 
 (Silm, 1977) need no further introduction. (Of course, there is also }{\i\lang1033 The Hobbit}{\lang1033 , but this book contains little linguistic information, and hardly anything at all about Que
nya.) Most of the Elvish names of people and places found in LotR (such as }{\i\lang1033 Aragorn}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 Glorfindel}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 Galadriel}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 Minas Tirith}{\lang1033 
) are Sindarin, but there are substantial samples of Quenya as well. In LotR, we find one of the longest Quenya texts known, the poem }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  near the end of chapter VIII ("Farewell to L\'f3
rien") in Book Two in the first volume, }{\i\lang1033 The Fellowship of the Ring}{\lang1033 . Also known as Galadriel's Lament, this is the poem commencing with the words }{\b\lang1033 Ai! lauri\'eb lantar lassi s\'farinen}{\lang1033 ...
\par Various shorter samples of Quenya are also sprinkled throughout LotR, such as Frodo speaking in tongues in Shelob's lair ("}{\i\lang1033 Aiya E\'e4rendil Elenion Ancalima!}{\lang1033 
 he cried, and he knew not what he had spoken"), the praise that the Ringbearers received on the Field of Cormallen (part Sindar
in, part Quenya), Elendil's Declaration as repeated by Aragorn at his coronation, and Treebeard's greeting to Celeborn and Galadriel. The Quenya parts of the }{\i\lang1033 Cormallen Praise}{\lang1033  (as I shall refer to it), as found in volume 3, }{
\lang1033\cgrid0 Book Six, chapter IV ("The Field of Cormallen"), go like this: }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 A laita te, laita te! Andave laituvalmet!}{\lang1033\cgrid0  ... }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 Cormacolindor, a laita t\'e1rienna!}{\lang1033\cgrid0  (Cf. }{
\i\lang1033\cgrid0 Sauron Defeated}{\lang1033\cgrid0  p. 47.) This is translated in }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , p. 308: "Bless them, bless them, long we will praise them." \endash  "Th
e Ring bearers, bless (or praise) them to the height."
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033\cgrid0 In the next chapter (V) we have }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 Elendil's Declaration}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , repeated by Aragorn at his coronation: }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 Et E\'e4rello Endorenna ut\'fa
lien. Sinome maruvan ar hildinyar tenn' Ambar-metta}{\lang1033\cgrid0 . This is translated in the text as "out of the Great Sea to Middle-earth I am come. In this place will I abide, and my heirs, unto the ending of the world."
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\lang1033\cgrid0 Treebeard's Greeting}{\lang1033\cgrid0  in the chapter after that (VI) goes }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 a vanimar, vanim\'e1lion nostari}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , translated both in }{
\i\lang1033\cgrid0 Letters}{\lang1033\cgrid0  p. 308 ("o beautiful ones, parents of beautiful children") and }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 Sauron Defeated}{\lang1033\cgrid0  p. 73 ("fair ones begetters of fair ones"; this rendering is the more literal).
\par Quenya material (though mostly isolated words only) also occur in the Appendices to LotR, in particular Appendix E.
\par In the }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 Silmarillion}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , we also have a few short Quenya sentences. In chapter 20 there are some battle-cries: }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 \'dat\'falie'n aur\'eb! Aiya Eldali\'eb ar Atanat\'e1ri, ut\'falie'n aur\'eb!}{
\lang1033\cgrid0  "The day has come! Behold, people of the Eldar and Fathers of Men, the day has come!" \endash  }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 Auta i l\'f3m\'eb!}{\lang1033\cgrid0  "The night is passing!" \endash  }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 Aur\'eb entuluva!}{
\lang1033\cgrid0  "Day shall come again!" Near the end of chapter 21 there is the cry }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 a T\'farin Turambar turun ambartanen}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , "o T\'farin master of doom by doom mastered" \endash  but }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 
Unfinished Tales}{\lang1033\cgrid0  p. 138 indicates that }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 turun}{\lang1033\cgrid0  should rather read }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 tur\'fan'}{\lang1033\cgrid0  (evidently shortened from a longer form }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 tur\'fana}{
\lang1033\cgrid0 , the final -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 a}{\lang1033\cgrid0  dropping out because the next word also begins in }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 a}{\lang1033\cgrid0 -). The }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 Silmarillion}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 Appendix, "Elements in Quenya and Sindarin names", also mentions many words belonging to these two languages.
\par In the case of other sources, a more summary survey will suffice, since these books and journals (unlike }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 LotR}{\lang1033\cgrid0  and }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 Silm}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
!) have not appeared in too many editions and translations. Hence I can simply refer to the relevant book and page when quoting from them, and that reference will hopefully be precise enough. We will list them by the abbreviations used hereinafter: }{
\lang1033 
\par \'a4 RGEO: }{\i\lang1033 The Road Goes Ever On}{\lang1033  (our page references are to the Second Edition of 1978, ISBN 0-04-784011-0). The first edition was publishe
d in 1968; this is thus one of our very few sources outside LotR that were published in Tolkien's own lifetime, which lends it extra authority (for when something had been published, he would normally consider it a fixed and unchangeable part of the mytho
s). While RGEO is basically a song cycle (Tolkien's poems with music by Donald Swann), Tolkien also included quite extensive notes on two Elvish poems occurring in LotR, }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  and the Sindarin hymn }{\i\lang1033 
A Elbereth Gilthoniel}{\lang1033  (RGEO:66-76). Besides writing them out in F\'ebanorian script, he also provided an interlinear translation of both; this allows us to know with certainty which word means what. He also rearranged }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri
\'eb}{\lang1033  into a clearer "prose" version, as an alternative to the poetic version in LotR \endash  providing us with a unique opportunity to compare poetic style and prose style in Quenya. Hence I will sometimes refer to the "prose }{\i\lang1033 
Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 ". 
\par \'a4 UT: }{\i\lang1033 Unfinished Tales}{\lang1033  (1980, ISBN 0-04-823208-4). A posthumously published collection of material supplementing and som
etimes fleshing out the stories of LotR and Silm, though as the title implies, not all of it was ever finished by the author. Of particular interest to students of Elvish is}{\i\lang1033  Cirion's Oath}{\lang1033  found in UT:305: }{\b\lang1033 
Vanda sina termaruva Elenna\'b7n\'f3r\'ebo alcar enyalien ar Elendil vorondo voronw\'eb. Nai tiruvantes i h\'e1rar mahalmassen mi N\'famen ar i Eru i or ily\'eb mahalmar e\'e4 tennoio.}{\lang1033 
 The (not entirely literal) translation given in the text goes: "This oath shall stand in memory of the glory of the Land of the Star, and of the f
aith of Elendil the Faithful, in the keeping of those who sit upon the thrones of the West and of the One who is above all thrones for ever." Tolkien added some interesting notes about the Quenya words (UT:317), allowing us to analyze the Oath itself.

\par \'a4 Letters: }{\i\lang1033 The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien}{\lang1033 
 (1981, ISBN 0-04-440664-9). Edited by Humphrey Carpenter, Tolkien's biographer, this collection of letters also contains some linguistic information. Readers of LotR occasionally wrote to Tolkien asking questions touc
hing on the samples of Quenya and Sindarin found in that work, and this being Tolkien's favourite subject, he often wrote fairly detailed answers. Among other things, }{\i\lang1033 Letters}{\lang1033 
 provides translations of some Elvish samples that are not translated in the LotR itself, e.g. }{\b\lang1033 Aiya E\'e4rendil Elenion Ancalima}{\lang1033  = "hail E\'e4
rendil brightest of stars" (Letters:385; we have already quoted the translation of the Cormallen Praise in Letters:}{\lang1033\cgrid0 308}{\lang1033 ).
\par \'a4 MC: }{\i\lang1033 The Monsters and the Critics and Other Essays}{\lang1033  (1983, ISBN 0-04-809019-0). This book contains Tolkien's essay }{\i\lang1033 A Secret Vice}{\lang1033 
 (MC:198-223), in which he sets out his thoughts and theories about language-construction in general. He also included some "Elvish" poems, most notably }{\i\lang1033 Oilima Markirya}{\lang1033  or "The Last Ark", which is listed in se
veral versions. The version of }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{\lang1033  that is most interesting to people studying the kind of Quenya exemplified in LotR, is found in MC:221-223 (including some valuable annotation).
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Having edited and published Silm, UT and MC from the papers his father
 had left behind, Christopher Tolkien commenced what would become a highly ambitious project. In the period 1983-1996, he published a series of no less than twelve volumes, demonstrating how his father had developed his world-famous narratives over many y
ears. The }{\i\lang1033 History of Middle-earth}{\lang1033  series (HoME) presents the many "layers" of manuscripts, chronicling how the }{\i\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\lang1033 
 and LotR as we know them gradually came into being, and also presenting other materials relating to Tolkien's vast mythology. For con
venience I will list all the volumes of HoME by their standard abbreviations, though I will not actually quote from each and every one of them:
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \'a4 LT1: }{\i\lang1033 The Book of Lost Tales 1}{\lang1033  (1983, ISBN 0-04-823231-5)
\par \'a4 LT2: }{\i\lang1033 The Book of Lost Tales 2}{\lang1033  (1984, ISBN 0-04-823338-2)
\par \'a4 LB: }{\i\lang1033 The Lays of Beleriand}{\lang1033  (1985, ISBN 0-04-440018-7)
\par \'a4 SM: }{\i\lang1033 The Shaping of Middle-earth}{\lang1033  (1986, ISBN 0-04-440150-7)
\par \'a4 LR: }{\i\lang1033 The Lost Road}{\lang1033  (1987, ISBN 0-04-440398-4)
\par \'a4 RS: }{\i\lang1033 The Return of the Shadow}{\lang1033  (1988, ISBN 0-04-440669-X)
\par \'a4 TI: }{\i\lang1033 The Treason of Isengard}{\lang1033  (1989, ISBN 0-261-10220-6)
\par \'a4 WR: }{\i\lang1033 The War of the Ring}{\lang1033  (1990, ISBN 0-261-10223-0)
\par \'a4 SD: }{\i\lang1033 Sauron Defeated}{\lang1033  (1992, ISBN 0-261-10305-9)
\par \'a4 MR: }{\i\lang1033 Morgoth's Ring}{\lang1033  (1993, ISBN 0-261-10300-8)
\par \'a4 WJ: }{\i\lang1033 The War of the Jewels}{\lang1033  (1994, ISBN 0-395-71041-3)
\par \'a4 PM: }{\i\lang1033 The Peoples of Middle-earth}{\lang1033  (1996, ISBN 0-216-10337-7)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par Each of these books provide clues to the structure of Tolkien's languages, though often in a somewhat incidental fashion (Christopher Tolkien included relatively little of his father's narrowly linguistic writings, wh
ich being highly technical would be of limited interest to the general readership). For people interested in Tolkien's languages as they appear in LotR, the most important volumes of HoME are LR, WJ and SD, which any serious student of these languages sho
uld have in his or her private library. The only long Quenya text occurring in HoME, }{\i\lang1033 F\'edriel's Song}{\lang1033 , is found in LR:72 \endash 
 but more importantly, these books reproduce three important source documents that I will often refer to simply by name (as do most students of Tolkien's linguistic creation). Therefore, they will be briefly described here. We are talking about the }{
\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033  and the essays }{\i\lang1033 Quendi and Eldar}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 Lowdham's Report}{\lang1033 .
\par \tab 1. The }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033  (called "Etym" for short) is found in LR:347-400. (I should
 mention that there are different editions of LR around, so there is unfortunately more than one pagination; my page references are to the edition normally used by Tolkien-linguists.) To casual readers undoubtedly the most baffling document in the entire 
H
oME series, this is our most important single source of "Elvish" vocabulary. However, it is not a regular dictionary. It is an alphabetical list of about six hundred primitive "bases" or roots, the various entries listing actual words derived from these r
oots as they appeared in later Elvish languages (sometimes the actual ulterior "primitive Elvish" form is also mentioned, closely reflecting the "base" itself). For instance, under the entry }{\b\lang1033 \'c1LAK}{\lang1033 
 (LR:348), itself defined "rushing", we find this series: "*}{\i\lang1033 alk-w}{\i\lang1033 {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 170 \\f "Times New Roman Special G1" \\s 14}{\fldrslt\f19\fs28}}}{\lang1033  swan: Q }{\i\lang1033 alqa}{\lang1033 ; T }{\i\lang1033 
alpa}{\lang1033 ; ON }{\i\lang1033 alpha}{\lang1033 ; N }{\i\lang1033 alf}{\lang1033 ." Tolkien's idea is that the Primitive Elvish word }{\b\lang1033 alk-w}{\b\lang1033 {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 170 \\f "Times New Roman Special G1" \\s 14}{\fldrslt
\f19\fs28}}}{\lang1033  developed into Q[uenya] }{\b\lang1033 alqa}{\lang1033 , T[elerin] }{\b\lang1033 alpa}{\lang1033 , O[ld] N[oldorin] }{\b\lang1033 alpha}{\lang1033  and N[oldorin] }{\b\lang1033 alf}{\lang1033 . The }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{
\lang1033  was written in the second half of the thirties, and the spelling and general concepts differ somewhat from the scenario of the LotR as published in the early fifties. (If we were to "update" the sample just quoted, we must read }{\i\lang1033 
Sindarin}{\lang1033  for Noldorin, and Quenya }{\b\lang1033 alqa}{\lang1033  and "Noldorin"/Sindarin }{\b\lang1033 alf}{\lang1033  should rather be spelt }{\b\lang1033 alqua}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 alph}{\lang1033 , respectively \endash 
 both words, so spelt, are actually attested in later writings.) Despite the fact that the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033  in some respects reflects a somewhat "outdated" linguistic scenario, Tolkien undertaking important revisions af
ter he wrote Etym, it is still a gold-mine of information (and as we have just demonstrated, it can to some extent readily be "updated" in accordance with Tolkien's later ideas). Of all the languages Tolkien mentioned in Etym, Quenya is in any case among 
t
he tongues that were not very significantly affected by his subsequent revisions. (In the case of "Noldorin", on the other hand, he would tinker with its phonology and imaginary evolution, and drastically alter its internal history, to produce Sindarin as
 we know it from LotR.)
\par \tab 2. }{\i\lang1033 Quendi and Eldar}{\lang1033  (sometimes "Q&E" for short) is found in WJ:360-417. This is ostensibly an essay on the "Origin and Meanings of the Elvish words referring to }{\i\lang1033 Elves}{\lang1033 
 and their varieties. With Appendices on their names for other Inc
arnates". This ground is certainly covered, but luckily (from our point of view!) there are many digressions, appendices and notes that provide much extra information about the Elvish languages as Tolkien had come to see them in the post-LotR period: This
 essay dates from ca. 1959-60. Christopher Tolkien felt that one substantial section departed too radically from the stated subject of the essay, and edited it out (see WJ:359, 396). Luckily, the omitted section was later published in the journal }{
\i\lang1033 Vinyar Tengwar}{\lang1033 , issue #39. When I quote from }{\i\lang1033 Quendi and Eldar}{\lang1033 , I will therefore sometimes refer to WJ and sometimes to }{\i\lang1033 Vinyar Tengwar}{\lang1033 
 (VT). "Digressive" though the section that appeared in VT may be, it is of course of immense interest to people studying Tolkien's languages.
\par \tab 3. }{\i\lang1033 Lowdham's Report}{\lang1033 , or in full }{\i\lang1033 Lowdham's Report on the Adunaic Language}{\lang1033 , can be found in SD:413-440. As the title implies, this report is mainly concerned with another language than Quenya: }{
\i\lang1033 Adunaic}{\lang1033  (in the LotR appendices spelt }{\i\lang1033 Ad\'fbnaic}{\lang1033 ), the vernacular of N\'famenor. However, a little information about Quenya, which in this report is referred to as "Avallonian", can also be gleaned 
\endash  the two languages sometimes being compared or contrasted. ("Lowdham" is just a fictional character of Tolkien's. Tol
kien sometimes presented even quite technical information about his languages as if he were merely quoting or referring the observations and viewpoints of various people residing }{\i\lang1033 within}{\lang1033 
 his mythos. Among his favourite fictional "sources" we find }{\i\lang1033 F\'ebanor}{\lang1033 , the greatest but also the proudest of the Noldor, }{\i\lang1033 R\'famil}{\lang1033  the sage of Tirion, and }{\i\lang1033 Pengolodh}{\lang1033 
 the loremaster of Gondolin: Many of Tolkien's characters seem to share their author's interest in mysterious scripts and strange languages.)
\par 
\par The sources so far mentioned are the ones published or edited by Tolkien himself or by his son \endash  except for }{\i\lang1033 Letters}{\lang1033 
, that was edited by Humphrey Carpenter. In addition there are a few works edited and published by others. Some very brief scraps of information can be extracted from }{\i\lang1033 J.R.R. Tolkien \endash  Artist and Illustrator}{\lang1033 
, edited by Wayne Hammond and Christina Scull. The results of the Editorial Team, scarce but not unimportant, must also be mentioned. The journal }{\i\lang1033 Vinyar Tengwar}{\lang1033  (VT), edited by Carl F. Hostetter, had its "golden age" 
in the period 1988-93, when the editor managed to uphold continuous bimonthly publication. When Hostetter and the other ET members in the early nineties started to receive original Tolkien material of the utmost interest to be edited and published, the ra
t
e of publication mysteriously dropped to about one issue a year, and this situation has continued throughout the latter half of the nineties and into the new decade. Not all of the few issues that have been published include any new Tolkien material, and 
those that do are usually devoted to very short scraps (that are moreover samples of very early material that is often clearly not LotR-compatible). 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 A few issues do stand out, however, and one of them has already been mentioned: In issue #39, July 1998, Hostetter published the part of }{\i\lang1033 Quendi and Eldar}{\lang1033 
 that Christopher Tolkien left out of WJ, as well as the companion essay }{\i\lang1033 \'d3sanwe-kenta}{\lang1033  (the latter is not strictly linguistic by its subject, but Tolkien nonetheless mentioned quite a few Quenya words). Some use
ful material also appeared in issue #41, July 2000, filling certain annoying gaps in our vocabulary (in particular regarding the verb "can") and providing interesting new information about the formation of the present tense. In January 2002, various Queny
a translations of the Pater Noster and the Ave Maria were published in issue #43; Tolkien the Catholic produced more than one Elvish version of these texts.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab The other main results of the ET's editing efforts for the most part consist of wordlist material: the }{\i\lang1033 Gnomish Lexicon}{\lang1033  (GL) and the }{\i\lang1033 Qenya Lexicon}{\lang1033 
 (QL, a.k.a. the }{\i\lang1033 Qenyaqetsa}{\lang1033 , abbreviated QQ). The GL also mentions a few "Qenya" words (just like the QL mentions some }{\i\lang1033 Gnomish}{\lang1033 
 words; the languages are not infrequently compared or contrasted). Regarding "Qenya" as opposed to (LotR-style) Quenya, see below. These Lexicons were published in issues #11 and #12 of the journal }{\i\lang1033 Parma Eldalamberon}{\lang1033 
, 1995 and 1998, respectively. They were originally written during World War I, when the earliest form of Tolkien's mythos 
began to take shape: The QL manuscript is usually dated to 1915, the GL to 1917. Substantial excerpts were published already in 1983-84, Christopher Tolkien drawing heavily on the Lexicons in the appendices to LT1 and LT2. Prefixed to each Lexicon, }{
\i\lang1033 Parma}{\lang1033  also published some related material: a never finished }{\i\lang1033 Gnomish Grammar}{\lang1033  in #11, and some phonological descriptions for "Qenya" in #12.
\par 
\par Of the actual Quenya samples so far mentioned, I shall often refer to }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 Treebeard's Greeting}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 Elendil's Declaration}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 Cirion's Oath}{\lang1033 , }{
\i\lang1033 F\'edriel's Song}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{\lang1033 
 simply by title or "name", not always providing a reference to book and page. From the discussion above the student will know where they are found (if you feel the urge to check the accuracy of my quotes!) In mos
t other cases I will provide a reference when I quote something, since it will usually be found in one of the sources that do allow a precise reference to book and page (since there is not a spate of different editions with differing pagination around). W
hen I refer to entries in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033  (in LR), I simply quote the entry-head, which can easily be located in all the various editions (irrespective of differing pagination).
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\cf2\lang1033 A WORD OF WARNING REGARDING PARTS OF THE CORPUS
\par }{\lang1033 Scattered in the sources liste
d above we have a total Quenya "corpus" that would amount to very roughly 150 pages if it were all brought together (though most of this would unfortunately just be unconnected wordlist material; the samples of actual }{\i\lang1033 text}{\lang1033 
 are much rarer and could probably
 be fitted into no more than two or three pages). But here a word of warning is in place: If you want to learn the kind of Quenya that you have encountered in LotR, not all of the samples found in this corpus are entirely "reliable" \endash 
 even though they are certainly genuine Tolkien. To avoid what is potentially a quagmire of confusion, the student should immediately internalize one fact: }{\i\lang1033 The kind of Quenya exemplified in LotR is not the only kind of Quenya there is.}{
\lang1033  If you start analyzing all the samples of 
Quenya that we now have, you will soon realize that they do not form a homogenous mass. Most samples certainly "look" much the same, never straying too far from the Finnish-inspired word-shapes, but much of the early material (never published during Tolki
en's lifetime) can be shown to employ or presuppose words, inflectional endings and grammatical rules that differ from the system of LotR-style Quenya. By all means, no sample is }{\i\lang1033 entirely}{\lang1033  different from LotR-style Quenya \endash 
 but in material predating the mid-thirties, neither is there any sample that is entirely identical.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Tolkien was, so to speak, all too good when it came to devising languages. Fixing them in one clear-cut and unchangeable form was an almost impossible task for him. There were ever new ideas
 that he wanted to work into their structure, even if these ideas contradicted and obsoleted things that he had written earlier. We can be sure that his fictional character Lowdham speaks for Tolkien himself (SD:240): 
\par 
\par }\pard \li708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx3969\adjustright {\lang1033 In making up a language you are free
: too free (...) When you're just inventing, the pleasure or fun is in the moment of invention; but as you are the master your whim is law, and you may want to have the fun all over again, fresh. You're liable to be for ever niggling, altering, refining, 
wavering, according to your linguistic mood and to your changes of taste.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par With the posthumous publication of many of Tolkien's writings, we got evidence for plenty of 'niggling, altering, refining, and wavering' on his part. It is now evident that Quenya a
ppeared in many incarnations, and while they all share the same general "style" and would probably look the same to a fresh student, they actually differ in many details of grammar, vocabulary and even phonology. A powerful demonstration of the extent of 
Tolkien's revisions is provided by the }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{\lang1033 
 poem, which exists in one version dating from the early thirties (MC:213) and another that is about forty years younger, dating from the last decade of Tolkien's life (MC:221-223). Both versions have (almost) 
the same meaning, but the late version is in the full sense of the word a }{\i\lang1033 translation}{\lang1033  of the former, not a mere rewriting: Only a few words and inflectional endings are common to both texts.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Since Tolkien in pre-LotR sources typically used the spelling }{\i\lang1033 Qenya}{\lang1033 
 instead of Quenya (though the intended pronunciation is the same), I and others often use "Qenya" (preferably in quotes) as a name of early variants of Quenya that are more or less different from the form that appears in LotR and later sources. The firs
t version of }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{\lang1033  I would thus call a "Qenya" poem; only the later version is Quenya as we know it from LotR. Some other poems reproduced in MC (}{\i\lang1033 Nieninqe}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 Earendel}{\lang1033 
, pp. 215-216), as well as an alternative "Last Ark" poem of another meaning than the classical }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{\lang1033 
 (MC:221), are also decidedly "Qenya" rather than Quenya. These texts may certainly be enjoyed for their own qualities, but as source-material for students trying to figure out the structure of LotR-style Quenya they exclude themselves.
\par As we would expect, the language }{\i\lang1033 generally}{\lang1033  becomes more and more similar to its "final form" the closer we get to Tolkien's writing LotR. For instance, the relatively late text }{\i\lang1033 F\'edriel's Song}{\lang1033 
 is almost, but not quite LotR-style Quenya. However, one should no
t have a simplistic view of these things, thinking that Tolkien started out in 1915 with a language that was wildly different from the Quenya of LotR and that it "gradually" evolved into LotR-style Quenya in a nice and tidy evolutionary line. The scarcity
 
of published material does not allow us to follow the process in any detail, but it is already evident that Tolkien kept changing his mind back and forth, not only doing revisions but frequently also undoing them later: Indeed some of the very earliest ma
terial, written during WWI, gives an overall impression of being }{\i\lang1033 more}{\lang1033 
 similar to LotR-style Quenya than certain "Qenya" poems of the early thirties. It may seem that Tolkien, rather than boldly "progressing" toward LotR-style Quenya, made a series of detour
s on the way, sometimes venturing off into radical revisions that eventually proved dissatisfying and were rejected. Yet in other cases certain revisions proved durable, Tolkien evidently perceiving them as genuine improvements \endash 
 but the whole process was wholly unpredictable, for in a game like this there could be no imaginable objective criteria for what constitutes an improvement: As Tolkien had Lowdham saying, "Your whim is law." 
\par Something really close to LotR-style Quenya seems to have made its first appearance in the latter half of the thirties, with the writing of the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 
. But it is not to be thought that everything was completely settled even after LotR had been written and published in the first half of the fifties; Tolkien indeed used the opportunity to tinker just a little with even the }{\i\lang1033 published}{
\lang1033  samples of Quenya in this work when a revised edition appeared in 1966 (and even more niggling was certainly going on behind the scenes). Seven years later he died, and there is little reason to b
elieve that he ever managed (or even seriously tried) to fix Quenya and his other languages in }{\i\lang1033 one}{\lang1033  definite cut-in-stone form \endash 
 sorting out every detail. Members of the Editorial Team have indicated that Tolkien's later manuscripts bear witness to one last
 phase of intense experimentation, but apparently, no final or definite version of the language ever emerged. This was not necessarily a "failure", like a composer never managing to finish his great opera: "Unceasing change, often frustrating to those who
 
study these languages, was inherent in this art," Christopher Tolkien observes (SD:440). In another place, he remarks regarding his father's work on the languages that "it seems indeed that they very attempt to write a definitive account produced immediat
e dissatisfaction and the desire for new constructions: so the most beautiful manuscripts were soon treated with disdain" (LR:342). Insofar as "delight lay in the creation itself", Tolkien }{\i\lang1033 could not}{\lang1033 
 write a definitive account, or his fun would be past and over.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab 
Nonetheless, if compared to Tolkien's intense experimentation in the twenty years from 1915, Quenya does seem to have entered a somewhat "stable" phase in the second half of the thirties. Over the next decade Tolkien wrote LotR, which included some s
amples of Quenya as it now appeared (most notably }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 
). With the eventual publication of LotR in 1954-55, these forms became a "fixed" part of the mythos (despite Tolkien's slight tinkering in the 1966 revision). Having published LotR, Tolkien obviousl
y could not revise his languages anything as freely as he could before. Reportedly, there are hints in his post-LotR manuscripts that he indeed felt somewhat constrained. But this relative stability would later be good news for people wanting to learn or 
study "the" Quenya, Tolkien's more-or-less final decision on how this language had "really been" back in the remote ages chronicled by his narratives.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Some (including me) have referred to this as }{\i\lang1033 mature Quenya}{\lang1033 . Others feel this term to be unduly disparaging
 to the earlier forms of Quenya or "Qenya", since the inevitable implication is that they were somehow immature and inferior. Artistically, subjectively speaking I do think the "final" form of Quenya is more attractive than Tolkien's earlier experiments, 
and there can be no doubt that }{\i\lang1033 this}{\lang1033  is the kind of Quenya that most students will primarily want to learn \endash 
 not the earlier variants that Tolkien himself rejected. For that matter, this is certainly the version of Quenya that Tolkien himself would have want
ed us to study; if it had been up to him, we would never have seen any other versions! He took the utmost care to ensure that his mythos would remain free from internal contradictions, and he would never have recognized contradictory variants of Quenya as
 
being somehow equally valid. Indeed it should be noted that elderly Tolkien referred to his earliest form of "Qenya" as "very primitive" (PM:379). Hence we have no choice but to treat the early material with considerable caution, and there is little reaso
n to believe that Tolkien would have been greatly insulted if others were to say (or indeed to agree!) that his early "Qenya" variants are not quite as attractive as his later, carefully refined version(s) of the language.
\par Even so, in this course I have opted to speak, not of "mature Quenya", but rather of }{\i\lang1033 LotR-style Quenya}{\lang1033 
. The latter term must be wholly uncontroversial. The language that this course teaches is of course LotR-style Quenya, as well as it can be approximated at the present stage \endash  but there i
s no point in pretending that the various earlier "Qenya" variants never existed. I will indeed refer to some of their features, to give the student some idea of what kind of variations occur in the material. Apart from such academic considerations, the e
a
rly material is something we may "fall back on" where material closer to (and ideally postdating) the writing of LotR is insufficient for our needs. In particular, we may cannibalize the "Qenya" material for useful vocabulary items, in each case making su
r
e that the words we carry over into LotR-style Quenya fit this tongue (i.e., they must not clash with later words of different meaning, and the shape of the words themselves must fit the phonology and derivational system of the language as Tolkien eventua
lly came to envision it). After all, }{\i\lang1033 all}{\lang1033 
 the incarnations of Q(u)enya in the entire period from the language was invented in 1915 and until Tolkien's death in 1973 may well be seen as endless variations on somewhat the same themes. Therefore it is in a way 
only fitting that in our attempts to develop a useable form of Quenya, we take everything into consideration. But as for the overall grammatical and phonological structure, we must give priority to Tolkien's vision as it manifested in LotR and writings po
stdating this work: If we have any respect whatsoever for Tolkien's intentions, the form of Quenya that we attempt to crystallize must be LotR-compatible.
\par Little can be easy or clear-cut in this strange corner of Language. Reconstructing the structure of Qu
enya is like trying to piece together a huge puzzle of far-sundered pieces. Many pieces are simply missing, vast amounts of material being inaccessible to scholars (and to make matters worse, the ones who are supposed to be publishing it often seem far mo
r
e concerned about concealing it). Moreover, because of Tolkien's frequent revisions you can't even be sure that all the pieces you do find belong to the same puzzle at all. Some clearly do not fit and can be ignored; many other fall in the category of "do
ubtful", and you don't really know what to do with them.
\par In this course I will mention some of the variations and present my hopefully qualified guesses as to what we should accept as authoritative and what is probably best ignored. Indeed, due to the general lack of }{\i\lang1033 explicit}{\lang1033 
 grammatical information from Tolkien, I will not always present Quenya grammar with confidence and authority; rather you will often see me review whatever evidence is available and try to make out some rules that we can follow when putt
ing together our own Quenya compositions. But in a way this is precisely what I should like to do anyway, so as to acquaint students with the kind of deductions that the field of Tolkienian linguistics is all about at this stage. Concerning some material 
I
 published earlier, I've had (gentle) complaints to the effect that I merely listed my conclusions without showing what they were based on, somewhat dogmatically asserting that "this is how it is, take my word for it". I think this style was unavoidable i
n a brief presentation, but here I will in many cases avail myself of the opportunity to go back to the primary sources and really }{\i\lang1033 demonstrate}{\lang1033  what kind of deductions underlie everything.
\par Precisely because Tolkien's Quenya is a somewhat fluid entity, fixed 
in general outline but with endless contradictory variations when it comes to the details, we can to some extent feel free to crystallize our own standard (not making it more difficult than we have to). As long as we piece together a usable system from el
ements Tolkien provided, even though there is no way we can accept all the known variations within a single, unified system, the resulting language }{\i\lang1033 will}{\lang1033  be "real Quenya" \endash  to the extent such a thing can exist.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang1033 SPELLING CONVENTIONS
\par }{\lang1033 Over the decades, Tolkien
's spelling of Quenya varied in certain details. As discussed above, just about every aspect of Quenya was somewhat "variable", but unlike the unstable grammar, the spelling variations are not very consequential: In theory our alphabet is not the writing 
native to Quenya anyway. Tolkien was merely hesitating on how to best render into our own letters the supposed "original Elvish script" (the }{\i\lang1033 Tengwar}{\lang1033 , also called }{\i\lang1033 F\'ebanorian}{\lang1033  writing \endash 
 a singularly beautiful script that Tolkien devised with the same loving car
e as the languages themselves). In this course, a consistent spelling has been imposed on the material, mostly based on the spelling used in LotR (I say "mostly based" because the spelling used in LotR is not entirely consistent either, but it is close!) 
Concerning the spelling used in LotR, Tolkien wrote: "The archaic language of lore [namely Quenya] is meant to be a kind of 'Elven-latin', and by transcribing it into a spelling closely resembling that of Latin (except that }{\i\lang1033 y}{\lang1033 
 is only used as a consonant, as }{\i\lang1033 y}{\lang1033  in E[nglish] }{\i\lang1033 Yes}{\lang1033 ) the similarity to Latin has been increased ocularly" (}{\i\lang1033 Letters}{\lang1033 :176).
\par 
\par I will outline the spelling conventions used in this work. What follows is not something a fresh student needs to carefully internalize. People who want to study Quen
ya should nonetheless be aware of the major spelling inconsistencies in the primary sources. Guided primarily by the spelling Tolkien used in LotR, I have regularized the following features: 
\par 
\par }{\i\lang1033 Vowel length indicated by an accent (and no other symbol):}{\lang1033  In his spelling of Quenya, Tolkien always used some kind of symbol to mark vowels that are to be pronounced }{\i\lang1033 long}{\lang1033 
 (if you don't know what a vowel is, see the first regular lesson). But precisely what symbol he used is somewhat variable. Sometimes he uses a }{\i\lang1033 macron}{\lang1033 , a short horizontal line above the vowel; this is especially common in the }{
\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033  and certain other "philological" writings. Sometimes a }{\i\lang1033 circumflex}{\lang1033  is used, e.g. }{\b\lang1033 \'f4}{\lang1033  in the word }{\b\lang1033 f\'f4lima}{\lang1033 
 "secretive" from the earliest "Qenya" dictionary (LT2:340/QL:38). But in LotR and most sources postdating it, Tolkien typically uses a normal }{\i\lang1033 accent}{\lang1033  to indicate vowel-length, and so will we here: long }{\b\lang1033 \'e1}{
\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 \'e9}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 \'ed}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 \'f3}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 \'fa}{\lang1033  as opposed to short }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 , }{
\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 . So if I ever needed the word }{\b\lang1033 f\'f4lima}{\lang1033 , I would spell it }{\b\lang1033 f\'f3lima}{\lang1033  instead. W
hen quoting Primitive Elvish forms, I will however use circumflexes to mark long vowels. In the sources, macrons are normally used instead: We have already quoted }{\i\lang1033 alk-w}{\i\lang1033 {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 170 \\f 
"Times New Roman Special G1" \\s 14}{\fldrslt\f19\fs28}}}{\lang1033  "swan" from the entry }{\i\lang1033 \'c1LAK}{\lang1033  in Etym., the macron above the final }{\i\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  indicating that the vowel is long. However, writing }{
\i\lang1033 alk-w\'e2}{\lang1033  (etc.) instead is safer in a document that is to be distributed over the Internet; vowels with macrons may be replaced by various weird symbols if the software of the recipients is not overly fond of linguistics.
\par 
\par -}{\i\lang1033  C}{\lang1033  rather than }{\i\lang1033 K}{\lang1033 : If you bothered looking up the reference I gave for the sentence }{\b\lang1033 Anar caluva tielyanna}{\lang1033  above (}{\i\lang1033 Unfinished}{\lang1033  }{\i\lang1033 Tales}{
\lang1033  p. 22), you may have noticed that in the source, the middle word is actually spelt }{\b\lang1033 kaluva}{\lang1033  instead. In Quenya, }{\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033  represent the same sound (pronounced }{
\i\lang1033 K}{\lang1033 ); Tolkien just couldn't make up his mind which letter to use. In pre-LotR sources, such as the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033  and the early }{\i\lang1033 Qenya Lexicon}{\lang1033 , he mostly used }{\b\lang1033 k}{
\lang1033  (though in a few cases, }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033  pops up in these sources as well). Since the original inspiration for Quenya was Finnish, and Finnish orthography employs the letter }{\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033 
, it is not surprising that Tolkien originally preferred that grapheme. But as is evident from }{\i\lang1033 Letters}{\lang1033 :176 quoted above, he later decided that in LotR, he would spell Quenya as similar to }{\i\lang1033 Latin}{\lang1033 
 as possible. Guided by Latin orthography, he started to use the letter }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033  instead of }{\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033 : "I decided to be 'consistent' and spell Elvish names and words throughout without }{\i\lang1033 k}{\lang1033 
" (Letters:247). For instance, the word for "metal" had been spelt }{\b\lang1033 tinko}{\lang1033  in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033  (entry }{\i\lang1033 TINK\'d4}{\lang1033 
), but in LotR Appendix E, the same word with the same meaning appears as }{\b\lang1033 tinco}{\lang1033  instead. Hence we regularize }{\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033  to }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033 
 throughout. It is a curious fact that Tolkien, even in sources that postdate LotR, in many (indeed most) cases reverted to the use of }{\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033 . His writings are quite inconsistent on this point. A word for "Dwarf" is given as }{
\b\lang1033 Kasar}{\lang1033  with a }{\b\lang1033 k }{\lang1033 in WJ:388; yet on the next page Tolkien switches to }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033  when quoting the Quenya name of Moria: }{\b\lang1033 Casarrondo}{\lang1033  ("Dwarf-cave" or 
"Dwarf-hall"). A word for "house" appears as }{\b\lang1033 k\'f6a}{\lang1033  in WJ:369 (}{\b\lang1033 k\'f6arya}{\lang1033  "his house"), but in MR:250 the same word is spelt with a }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033  in the compound }{\b\lang1033 c\'f6acalina}{
\lang1033  "light of the house" (an Elvish expression for the soul inside the body). In some late notes published in VT41:10, Tolkien mentioned a word }{\b\lang1033 ruskuite}{\lang1033  "foxy" using the letter }{\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033  rather than }{
\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033 , but immediately afterwards he wrote down a word }{\b\lang1033 calarus}{\lang1033  "polished copper" using }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033  rather than }{\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033 . From the posthumously published }{\i\lang1033 
Silmarillion}{\lang1033  we remember names like }{\b\lang1033 Melkor}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 Tulkas}{\lang1033 , but in MR:362, 382 the spellings used are }{\b\lang1033 Melcor}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 Tulcas}{\lang1033 
. The Quenya word for "horse" is spelt }{\b\lang1033 rocco}{\lang1033  in Letters:282, but in Letters:382 we have }{\b\lang1033 rokko}{\lang1033  instead. Imitating Tolkien's persistent indecision in this matter would be quite pointle
ss or even confusing. For instance, the Quenya word for "bed" is given in LR:363 as }{\b\lang1033 kaima}{\lang1033 , but in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  in LotR, the obviously related word "lies" is spelt }{\b\lang1033 caita}{\lang1033 
. Maintaining the inconsistent spelling out of some kind of misunderstood reverence would obscure the relationship between the words; to go with }{\b\lang1033 caita}{\lang1033 , the word for "bed" clearly ought to be spelt }{\b\lang1033 caima}{\lang1033 
. I should mention that there are those who would regularize the material to }{\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033  instead, discarding the spellings used in LotR in favour of the orth
ography Tolkien uses in many other sources. This is only a matter of taste, and in the "C or K" question all writers can essentially make their own choice, but I will normally adhere to the LotR spelling. After all, the LotR }{\i\lang1033 is}{\lang1033 
 a rather central work regarding the setting Tolkien placed his languages in.
\par 
\par }{\fs20\lang1033 NOTE: But in the case of the title of the }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Markirya}{\fs20\lang1033  poem, I tend to retain }{\i\fs20\lang1033 k}{\fs20\lang1033  simply because the word }{\b\fs20\lang1033 markirya}{\fs20\lang1033 
 or "ark" only occurs in the early, "Qenya" version of the poem. It is not found in the later Quenya version, though I don't know what we should otherwise call it. So in this case I will leave the }{\b\fs20\lang1033 k}{\fs20\lang1033 
 in to mark this as an early "Qenya" word, though a form }{\b\fs20\lang1033 marcirya}{\fs20\lang1033  would surely work in LotR-style Quenya as well \endash  and this is the spelling I would use if I
 ever needed the word "ark" in an actual Quenya text. I guess I would normally also retain }{\b\fs20\lang1033 k}{\fs20\lang1033  in some names that we are very familiar with from the }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\fs20\lang1033 : }{\b\fs20\lang1033 
Melkor}{\fs20\lang1033 , }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Tulkas}{\fs20\lang1033 , }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Kement\'e1ri}{\fs20\lang1033  and a few others. But the }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\fs20\lang1033  also employs forms like }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Calaquendi}{
\fs20\lang1033  (rather than }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Kalaquendi}{\fs20\lang1033 ), so there is little consistency in this work.
\par }{\lang1033 
\par - }{\i\lang1033 QU}{\lang1033  rather than just }{\i\lang1033 Q}{\lang1033 : In most pre-LotR sources, the combination "cw" is represented by the one letter }{\i\lang1033 q}{\lang1033 
. But in a few early sources (published only posthumously), and more importantly in LotR, Tolkien used }{\i\lang1033 qu}{\lang1033  rather than just }{\i\lang1033 q}{\lang1033 
: Again the inspiration was Latin spelling. This even affected the name of the language; as mentioned above, Tolkien's original spelling was }{\i\lang1033 Qenya}{\lang1033 . To quote another example, the word for "feather", spelt }{\b\lang1033 qesse}{
\lang1033  in a pre-LotR source (Etym., entry }{\i\lang1033 KWES}{\lang1033 ), became }{\b\lang1033 quesse}{\lang1033 
 in LotR (Appendix E). This is a change that is consistently carried through in Tolkien's post-LotR writings as far as we know them, so we need not hesitate to impose this spelling on the earlier 
material as well. (Tolkien's own son does so in LT1:170; when discussing the first element of the name }{\b\lang1033 Qerkaringa}{\lang1033  occurring in early material, Christopher Tolkien uses the spelling }{\b\lang1033 querka}{\lang1033 
 instead. I would go one step further and write }{\b\lang1033 querca}{\lang1033 .)
\par 
\par - }{\i\lang1033 X}{\lang1033  rather than }{\i\lang1033 KS}{\lang1033  (or for that matter }{\i\lang1033 CS}{\lang1033 ): Tolkien's spelling of what is to be pronounced "ks" varies. Most sources seem to have }{\b\lang1033 ks}{\lang1033 
, but occasionally, the spelling }{\b\lang1033 x}{\lang1033  is used instead (already in the }{\i\lang1033 Qenya Lexicon}{\lang1033  of ca. 1915, p. 95, we seem to have }{\b\lang1033 tuxa}{\lang1033  as a variant spelling of }{\b\lang1033 tuksa}{
\lang1033  "144"). Throughout the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 , the spelling }{\b\lang1033 ks}{\lang1033  is used, e.g. }{\b\lang1033 maksa}{\lang1033  "pliant, soft" (entry }{\i\lang1033 MASAG}{\lang1033 ). The }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{
\lang1033 , entry }{\i\lang1033 KARAK}{\lang1033 , thus gives }{\b\lang1033 Helkarakse}{\lang1033  as the name of the arctic area crossed by some of the Noldor when they went into exile. However, this name appears as }{\b\lang1033 Helcarax\'eb}{\lang1033 
 in the published }{\i\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\lang1033 , with }{\b\lang1033 x}{\lang1033  for }{\b\lang1033 ks}{\lang1033  (and }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033  for }{\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033 ), and we regularize in accordance with the latter spelling 
\endash  e.g. }{\b\lang1033 maxa}{\lang1033  rather than }{\b\lang1033 maksa}{\lang1033 . In published post-LotR sources, Tolkien seems to be using }{\b\lang1033 x}{\lang1033  rather than }{\b\lang1033 ks}{\lang1033  consistently, e.g. }{\b\lang1033 axan}
{\lang1033  "commandment" and }{\b\lang1033 nixe}{\lang1033  "frost" in WJ:399/417, or }{\b\lang1033 axo}{\lang1033  "bone" in MC:223 \endash  so }{\b\lang1033 x}{\lang1033 
 must be seen as his final decision in this matter. In LotR Appendix E, Tolkien refers to "the combinations }{\i\lang1033 ts}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 ps}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 ks}{\lang1033  (}{\i\lang1033 x}{\lang1033 ), that were favoured in
 Quenya"; this also seems to suggest that }{\b\lang1033 ks}{\lang1033  is to be represented by }{\b\lang1033 x}{\lang1033  in normal spelling. (No actual example of a Quenya word containing }{\b\lang1033 x}{\lang1033 /}{\b\lang1033 ks}{\lang1033 
 seems to occur in LotR, but as mentioned above, we have }{\b\lang1033 Helcarax\'eb}{\lang1033  in the }{\i\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\lang1033 .)
\par 
\par - }{\i\lang1033 N}{\lang1033  rather than }{\i\lang1033 \'d1}{\lang1033 : In many sources, Tolkien uses the symbol }{\i\lang1033 \'f1}{\lang1033 , which should not be pronounced as in Spanish orthography (e.g., as in }{\i\lang1033 se\'f1or}{\lang1033 
). "In the transcription }{\i\lang1033 \'f1}{\lang1033  [is used for] the F\'ebanorian letter for the back nasal, the }{\i\lang1033 ng}{\lang1033  of }{\i\lang1033 king}{\lang1033 " (MR:350). Unlike English, Quenya could originally have this }{
\i\lang1033 ng}{\lang1033  at the beginning of words (as well as in other positions where it may also occur in English). A prominent example is the word }{\b\lang1033 \'d1oldo}{\lang1033 , plural }{\b\lang1033 \'d1oldor}{\lang1033 
, which is so spelt in many sources. But in LotR Appendix E, Tolkien wrote that this }{\i\lang1033 ng}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 \'f1}{\lang1033  "has been transcribed }{\i\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  (as in }{\i\lang1033 Noldo}{\lang1033 
) according to the pronunciation in the Third Age". The list of Tengwar names in the same Appendix confirms the development Tolkien hinted at here: the pronunciation of certain symbols of Tengwar writing was slightly c
hanged as the long Ages of Middle-earth went by. The letters that were originally called }{\b\lang1033 ngoldo}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 ngwalme}{\lang1033  (= }{\b\lang1033 \'f1oldo}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 \'f1walme}{\lang1033 ) were later called }
{\b\lang1033 noldo}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 nwalme}{\lang1033  instead; since the letters were named after actual Quenya words containing the sound denoted by the letter, this reflects a development whereby initial }{\b\lang1033 \'f1}{\lang1033 
- becomes normal }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 -. Already in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033  of the mid-thirties, Tolkien hinted at a similar development: In the entry }{\i\lang1033 \'d1GAR(A)M}{\lang1033 , the word for "wolf" was listed as "}{
\i\lang1033 \'f1armo}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 narmo}{\lang1033 ", which is evidently to be understood as an older and a later form. MR:350 mentions a word }{\b\lang1033 \'f1\'f3l\'eb}{\lang1033  "lore, knowledge" that is spelt with initial }{
\b\lang1033 \'f1}{\lang1033 - in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033  as well (entry }{\i\lang1033 \'d1GOL}{\lang1033 , where it is glossed "wisdom"), but in the }{\i\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\lang1033  Appendix (entry }{\i\lang1033 g\'fbl}{\lang1033 
) it is spelt }{\b\lang1033 n\'f3l\'eb}{\lang1033 . This would be the later, Third Age form. We go for the Third Age form everywhere, regularizing }{\b\lang1033 \'f1}{\lang1033  to }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  throughout. (Notice, though, that in }{
\i\lang1033 Tengwar}{\lang1033  writing the distinction between the symbols transcribed }{\b\lang1033 \'f1}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  was upheld even after they had both come
 to be pronounced "n". But this is not a problem as long as we write Quenya in our normal alphabet.) Undoubtedly the combinations }{\b\lang1033 ng}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 nc}{\lang1033  in the middle of words are also technically }{\b\lang1033 \'f1g
}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 \'f1c}{\lang1033 , as in }{\b\lang1033 anga}{\lang1033  "iron" or }{\b\lang1033 anca}{\lang1033  "jaw", but this pronunciation comes
 naturally to speakers of English and does not have to be expressly represented in writing. As far as is known, Tolkien never used the letter }{\b\lang1033 \'f1}{\lang1033  before }{\b\lang1033 g}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033 
 in Quenya words, but only }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 .
\par 
\par - }{\i\lang1033 S}{\lang1033  rather than }{\i\lang1033 \'fe}{\lang1033 : This is a case somewhat similar to }{\b\lang1033 \'f1}{\lang1033  vs. }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 : Tolkien imagined that Quenya as spoken in Valinor possessed }{\b\lang1033 \'fe}{
\lang1033 , more or less like the sound spelt }{\i\lang1033 th}{\lang1033  in English }{\i\lang1033 think}{\lang1033 . (In Valinorean Quenya it was strictly a little more }{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 
-like than the English sound, pronounced with the tip of the tongue against the upper teeth only, not between the upper and lower teeth as in English.) However, in the dialect of the Noldor, this }{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 -like }{\b\lang1033 \'fe}{
\lang1033  eventually turned into normal }{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 , merging with preexisting }{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 'es (a change F\'ebanor vehemently but vainly opposed: see PM:331-339 for an eminent 
example of how intertwined Tolkien's languages and narratives can be). Quenya as a ceremonial language in Middle-earth always had }{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 , since only the Noldorin dialect was known there. In WJ:484, Tolkien mentions }{\b\lang1033 \'fe
inde}{\lang1033  as the Quenya word for "grey, pale or silvery grey", but adds that in the Noldorin ("\'d1") dialect, this became }{\b\lang1033 sinde}{\lang1033 . In WJ:319, we find }{\b\lang1033 \'feelma}{\lang1033 
 as a word for "fixed idea, will"; in this case the later Noldorin form }{\b\lang1033 selma}{\lang1033  is not mentioned there or elsewhere, but we would still use the latter form h
ere, since we are aiming for the kind of Quenya that was used in Middle-earth in the Third Age.
\par 
\par }{\i\lang1033 The diaeresis:}{\lang1033  In many cases, Tolkien adds a }{\i\lang1033 diaeresis}{\lang1033 , two dots, above a vowel, for instance }{\b\lang1033 \'e4}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 \'f6}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  in the names }
{\b\lang1033 E\'e4rendil}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 E\'f6nw\'eb}{\lang1033 . This is only to clarify the
 pronunciation, primarily for readers used to English orthography. It should be emphasized that the diaeresis is not in any way "necessary" to write correct Quenya. Tolkien wrote about the spelling }{\b\lang1033 \'eb }{\lang1033 
that it is "only a device of transcription, not needed in the original" \endash  that is, in the supposed "original" Tengwar writing (PM:343). It is not really "needed" in the transcription either \endash  Tolkien never used it in the }{\i\lang1033 
Etymologies}{\lang1033  \endash  and it can safely be left out in e-mail. Indeed some scholars advocate leavin
g it out altogether in all media, perceiving it as a superfluous graphic encumbrance useful only to people who don't know the first thing about Quenya (and to people used to the orthographies of such languages as German, Swedish or Finnish, it can be down
r
ight misleading). But I don't know; I guess I like to see the diaeresis in carefully presented texts, even if it doesn't tell me anything I don't know beforehand. It adds an exotic tint to the texts, and also represents a nod in the direction of the visua
l impression made by written Finnish, since Finnish orthography employs letters like }{\i\lang1033 \'e4}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 \'f6}{\lang1033  \endash  that however denote sounds distinct from normal }{\i\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 o}{
\lang1033 , which is not the case in Quenya spelling. 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 If we are to use the diaeresis, it should however be used in a co
nsistent way. In WJ:425, Christopher Tolkien comments on his father's "very variable" use of it, so some regularization is required. (Christopher Tolkien himself has been regularizing his father's spelling in some quotations; for instance, in PM:371 he ci
tes the Quenya word }{\b\lang1033 ross\'eb}{\lang1033  "fine rain, dew" from the entry }{\i\lang1033 ROS}{\i\lang1033\super 1}{\lang1033  in Etym., but there the word is actually spelt }{\b\lang1033 rosse}{\lang1033  with no diaeresis.)
\par The final -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  in (say) }{\b\lang1033 E\'f6nw\'eb}{\lang1033  is meant to remind the reader that final -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  is not silent, as it usually is in English orthography. "Final }{\i\lang1033 e}{\lang1033 
 is never mute or a mere sign of length as in English," Tolkien noted in LotR Appendix E (this very sentence providing two examples of this feature of English spelling, namely }{\i\lang1033 mute}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 mere}{\lang1033 
). He added that "to mark this final }{\i\lang1033 e}{\lang1033  is often (but not consistently) written }{\i\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033 ". As he says, this spelling is not used consistently, whether in LotR or in other sources \endash 
 cf. some of the words already quoted: }{\b\lang1033 quesse}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 sinde}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 nixe}{\lang1033 . Hereinafter, we will however be consistent about this: }{\b\lang1033 quess\'eb}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 sind\'eb}{
\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 nix\'eb}{\lang1033 . (Notice, however, that the diaeresis is not used in words where the final }{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033  is also the }{\i\lang1033 only}{\lang1033  vowel, as in short words like }{\b\lang1033 te}{\lang1033 
 "them" or }{\b\lang1033 ve}{\lang1033  "as, like" \endash  both of which occur in LotR. From time to time I see some overeager dot-fan produce spellings like }{\b\lang1033 t\'eb}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 v\'eb}{\lang1033 
, but while this is not in any way "harmful", it is quite superfluous: Tolkien never uses such spellings.)}{\i\lang1033 
\par }{\lang1033 Since only a }{\i\lang1033 final}{\lang1033  -}{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033  receives the diaeresis, the dots normally go if you add an ending to the word (or use it as the first element in a compound), since the -}{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033 
 is then no longer final. An attested example of this is provided by the word }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1maty\'e1v\'eb}{\lang1033  "sound-taste" (individual pleasure in word-forms), the plural of which is spelt }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1maty\'e1ver}{\lang1033 
 (MR:215-216). We do not see **}{\b\lang1033 l\'e1maty\'e1v\'ebr}{\lang1033 , for because of the plural ending -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 , the vowel }{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033 
 before it is not final anymore. (Throughout this course, a double asterisk ** is used to mark a wrong form.) Appendix D in LotR likewise indicates that the plural form of }{\b\lang1033 enqui\'eb}{\lang1033  (the Eldarin six-day week) is to be spelt }{
\b\lang1033 enquier}{\lang1033  rather than **}{\b\lang1033 enqui\'ebr}{\lang1033 .
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par Besides final }{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033 , we shall use the diaeresis to clarify the pronunciation of the combinations }{\b\lang1033 ea}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 eo}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 oe}{\lang1033 
 (sc. to indicate that both vowels are to be pronounced clearly separate: }{\i\lang1033 e-a}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 e-o}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 o-e}{\lang1033 ; hence for instance }{\b\lang1033 \'eba}{\lang1033  is }{\i\lang1033 not}{\lang1033 
 to be drawn together like }{\i\lang1033 ea}{\lang1033  in English }{\i\lang1033 heart}{\lang1033 ). In the case of }{\b\lang1033 e }{\lang1033 + }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 e }{\lang1033 + }{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033 
, the diaeresis is placed above the }{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033  as long as it appears as a lower-case letter: }{\b\lang1033 \'eba}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 \'ebo}{\lang1033 
. If, however, it is to be capitalized, the dots move to the next letter instead: }{\b\lang1033 E\'e4}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 E\'f6}{\lang1033  (as in }{\b\lang1033 E\'e4rendil}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 E\'f6nw\'eb}{\lang1033 
). Tolkien's own writings are not consistent in this matter; we adopt the spelling used in LotR and the }{\i\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\lang1033 
. Sometimes he places the diaeresis above a capital letter as well; for instance, the Quenya name of the universe in some texts appears as }{\b\lang1033 \'cba}{\lang1033  (e.g. MR:7), though according to the system we just sketched it should be }{
\b\lang1033 E\'e4}{\lang1033  \endash  as in the published }{\i\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\lang1033 . (Gross inconsistency is seen in Letters:386, where Tolkien refers to "the attempt of }{\i\lang1033 E\'e4rendil}{\lang1033  to cross }{\i\lang1033 \'cbar}{
\lang1033  [the ocean]" \endash  it must be either }{\b\lang1033 \'cbarendil}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 \'cbar}{\lang1033  OR }{\b\lang1033 E\'e4rendil}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 E\'e4r}{\lang1033 
!) Conversely, Tolkien sometimes places the diaeresis over the second vowel in the group even when the first vowel is }{\i\lang1033 not}{\lang1033  capitalized, resulting in spellings like }{\b\lang1033 e\'e4}{\lang1033 
 (UT:305, 317); we would rather spell it }{\b\lang1033 \'eba}{\lang1033  (as Tolkien himself did elsewhere; see VT39:6). In a footnote in MR:206, Christopher Tolkien observes that his father wavered between }{\b\lang1033 F\'eban\'e1ro}{\lang1033  and }{
\b\lang1033 Fe\'e4n\'e1ro}{\lang1033  (the Quenya form of the name }{\i\lang1033 F\'ebanor}{\lang1033 ); according to the system here outlined, it should be }{\b\lang1033 F\'eban\'e1ro}{\lang1033 .
\par 
\par In the case of }{\b\lang1033 oe}{\lang1033  (a very rare combination), we place the diaeresis over the }{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033 , as in the example }{\b\lang1033 lo\'ebnd\'eb}{\lang1033 
 in LotR Appendix D (this is the name of the middle day of the year in the calendar of the Elves). In Appendix E, Tolkien explicitly stated that the fact that }{\b\lang1033 oe}{\lang1033  is disyllabic is "often indicated by writing...}{\i\lang1033 o\'eb}
{\lang1033 ".
\par 
\par In some sources, the combination }{\b\lang1033 ie}{\lang1033  is also broken up with a diaeresis, resulting in spellings like }{\b\lang1033 Ni\'ebnna}{\lang1033  (name of a Vali\'eb or "goddess"), for instance in MR:49. Yet this spelling is not used in th
e published }{\i\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\lang1033 , that simply has }{\b\lang1033 Nienna}{\lang1033 . The LotR itself is somewhat ambiguous on this point. In Appendix A we have the names }{\b\lang1033 Telperi\'ebn}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 Silmari\'eb
n}{\lang1033  so spelt (though }{\i\lang1033 Unfinished Tales}{\lang1033  p. 173 has }{\b\lang1033 Silmarien}{\lang1033 ). However, the most substantial Quenya text in LotR, }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 
, does not use the diaeresis in this combination \endash  this text has }{\b\lang1033 tier}{\lang1033 , not }{\b\lang1033 ti\'ebr}{\lang1033 , for "paths" (though the latter spelling occurs in RGEO:67). In accordance with this example, as well as }{
\b\lang1033 Nienna}{\lang1033  in the }{\i\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\lang1033 , we will not use the diaeresis in the combination }{\b\lang1033 ie}{\lang1033 . If, however, the group -}{\b\lang1033 ie}{\lang1033  occurs at the }{\i\lang1033 end}{\lang1033 
 of a word, the }{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033  receives the diaeresis because it is final (wholly irrespective of the fact that it is also part of the combination }{\b\lang1033 ie}{\lang1033 ), in accordance with the rule established above. Hence }{
\b\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 Vali\'eb}{\lang1033  rather than }{\b\lang1033 Nam\'e1rie}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 Valie}{\lang1033 , and if the first element of }{\b\lang1033 Nienna}{\lang1033  occurs by itself, we will spell it }{
\b\lang1033 ni\'eb}{\lang1033  \endash  this is the word for "tear". Removing the plural ending -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  from }{\b\lang1033 tier}{\lang1033  "paths" likewise produces }{\b\lang1033 ti\'eb}{\lang1033  "path", since -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{
\lang1033  becomes final.
\par 
\par In many post-LotR sources, Tolkien also started to break up the combination }{\b\lang1033 oa}{\lang1033  by means of a diaeresis (apparently to warn the reader that "oa" is not drawn together as in English }{\i\lang1033 load}{\lang1033 
). Hence we have spellings like }{\b\lang1033 hr\'f6a}{\lang1033  "body" (MR:350 and passim). Cf. also some of the words quoted above: }{\b\lang1033 k\'f6arya}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 c\'f6acalina}{\lang1033 . However, in LotR Tolkien simply wrote }{
\b\lang1033 oa}{\lang1033 . Contrast the spelling }{\b\lang1033 loa}{\lang1033  used in LotR (Appendix D: "The Eldar also observed a short period or solar year...usually called }{\i\lang1033 loa}{\lang1033 ") with the spelling }{\b\lang1033 l\'f6a}{
\lang1033  in MR:426 (where the word occurs in the plural: "}{\i\lang1033 l\'f6ar}{\lang1033  upon }{\i\lang1033 l\'f6ar}{\lang1033 
" = years upon years). Regularizing in accordance with the system used in LotR, we will not use the diaeresis in the combination }{\b\lang1033 oa}{\lang1033 . Hence we will here use spellings like }{\b\lang1033 hroa}{\lang1033  "body", }{\b\lang1033 coa}{
\lang1033  "house" etc. }{\b\lang1033 Hroa}{\lang1033 
 without a diaeresis is actually found in MR:399-400 (and VT41:13), so we are not "tampering" with Tolkien's spelling, just crystallizing a standard by choosing one of the options his writings provide and carrying it through consistently. This, as I h
ave tried to demonstrate, is true of all the regularization I impose on the material.
\par 
\par }{\fs20\lang1033 [As for the }{\i\fs20\lang1033 English}{\fs20\lang1033  orthography employed in this work, it follows the author's home-made Mid-Atlantic convention. Therefore you will find British spellings like }{\i\fs20\lang1033 flavour}{
\fs20\lang1033 , }{\i\fs20\lang1033 colour}{\fs20\lang1033  (not American }{\i\fs20\lang1033 flavor}{\fs20\lang1033 , }{\i\fs20\lang1033 color}{\fs20\lang1033 ) next to American spellings like }{\i\fs20\lang1033 analyze}{\fs20\lang1033  (not British }{
\i\fs20\lang1033 analyse}{\fs20\lang1033 ). The orthography of my native Norwegian does not in all cases match the pronunciation, but it comes }{\i\fs20\lang1033 rather closer}{\fs20\lang1033  to the spoken language than any variant of 
English spelling does. Therefore, please allow me to gently mock the pointless variations introduced by well-meaning reformers of English orthography. It is actually beyond help, so why bother?]
\par }{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 Please download Lessons 1-5:}{\lang1033 
\par http://www.uib.no/People/hnohf/less-a.rtf
\par 
\par }}