{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff0\deflang1033\deflangfe1044{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f2\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 02070309020205020404}Courier New;}{\f3\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05050102010706020507}Symbol;}{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Times;}
{\f5\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Helvetica;}{\f6\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Courier;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Geneva;}
{\f8\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Tms Rmn;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Helv;}{\f10\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Serif;}
{\f11\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Sans Serif;}{\f12\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}New York;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}System;}
{\f14\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05000000000000000000}Wingdings;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604030504040204}Tahoma;}{\f16\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Marlett;}
{\f17\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Reference 1;}{\f18\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Reference 2;}{\f19\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05020603050405020304}Times New Roman Special G1;}
{\f20\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05020603050405020304}Times New Roman Special G2;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0506020202030204}Arial Narrow;}{\f22\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0a04020102020204}Arial Black;}
{\f23\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020404030301010803}Garamond;}{\f24\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02050604050505020204}Bookman Old Style;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0806030902050204}Impact;}
{\f26\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 050b0604020202020204}Arial Special G1;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 050b0604020202020204}Arial Special G2;}{\f28\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 050b0506020202030204}Arial Narrow Special G1;}
{\f29\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 050b0506020202030204}Arial Narrow Special G2;}{\f30\fscript\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 030f0702030302020204}Comic Sans MS;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604030504040204}Verdana{\*\falt arial};}
{\f32\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Angerthas;}{\f33\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Angerthas Moria;}{\f34\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0500000000000000}Tengwar Quenya;}
{\f35\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0500000000000000}Tengwar Sindarin;}{\f36\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0500000000000000}AngloSaxon Runes;}{\f37\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000400000000000000}Tengwar Parmaite;}
{\f38\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}GillSans;}{\f39\froman\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}.;}{\f40\fnil\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial Rounded MT Bold;}
{\f131\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Tahoma CE;}{\f132\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Tahoma Cyr;}{\f134\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Tahoma Greek;}{\f135\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Tahoma Tur;}{\f136\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Tahoma Baltic;}
{\f167\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial Narrow CE;}{\f168\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Narrow Cyr;}{\f170\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Narrow Greek;}{\f171\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Narrow Tur;}{\f172\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Narrow Baltic;}
{\f173\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial Black CE;}{\f174\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Black Cyr;}{\f176\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Black Greek;}{\f177\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Black Tur;}{\f178\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Black Baltic;}
{\f179\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Garamond CE;}{\f180\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Garamond Cyr;}{\f182\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Garamond Greek;}{\f183\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Garamond Tur;}{\f184\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Garamond Baltic;}
{\f185\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Bookman Old Style CE;}{\f186\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Bookman Old Style Cyr;}{\f188\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Bookman Old Style Greek;}{\f189\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Bookman Old Style Tur;}
{\f190\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Bookman Old Style Baltic;}{\f191\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Impact CE;}{\f192\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Impact Cyr;}{\f194\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Impact Greek;}{\f195\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Impact Tur;}
{\f196\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Impact Baltic;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid 
\snext0 Normal;}{\s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright \b\f1\fs28\lang1044\kerning28\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel1\adjustright \b\i\f1\lang1044\cgrid 
\sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{\s3\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel2\adjustright \f1\lang1044\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\s4\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel3\adjustright \b\f1\lang1044\cgrid 
\sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 4;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}{\s15\sa120\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext15 Body Text;}{\s16\fi-283\li283\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid 
\sbasedon0 \snext16 List;}{\s17\li283\sa120\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext17 Body Text 2;}}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\info{\title LESSON FIFTEEN}{\author Helge K\'e5re Fauskanger}{\operator Helge K\'e5re Fauskanger}
{\creatim\yr2002\mo3\dy24\min4}{\revtim\yr2002\mo3\dy24\min4}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords26567}{\nofchars151434}{\*\company  }{\nofcharsws185971}{\vern73}}\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl1417\margr1417\margt1417\margb1417 
\deftab708\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphhotz425\hyphcaps0\formshade\viewkind4\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot \fet0\sectd \linex0\headery709\footery709\colsx709\endnhere\sectdefaultcl {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9
\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid {\b\fs36\cf6\lang3081 LESSON SIXTEEN}{\b\fs32\lang3081 
\par The Instrumental case. Verbs with an unaccented vowel + -}{\i\fs32\lang3081 ta}{\b\fs32\lang3081 . The imperative. The }{\b\i\fs32\lang3081 nai}{\b\fs32\lang3081  formula.
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 
\par }{\lang3081 
If we accept the information provided in the Plotz letter as Tolkien's definite version of Quenya case system, we have now discussed all the Quenya noun cases except two. One of them is somewhat obscure; Tolkien supplied no further information about it, n
ot even telling us what this case is called. The relevant ending is -}{\b\lang3081 s}{\lang3081 , plural -}{\b\lang3081 is}{\lang3081 
. The Plotz lay-out suggests that this "Mystery Case" is simply a shorter, alternative version of the locative: The word exemplifying this case is listed in a parenthesis below the locative form of the same word. So instead of }{\b\lang3081 coass\'eb}{
\lang3081  "in a house", plural }{\b\lang3081 coassen}{\lang3081  "in houses", one may perhaps use the shorter forms }{\b\lang3081 coas}{\lang3081 , pl. }{\b\lang3081 coais}{\lang3081 
. However, since we cannot be entirely confident regarding the function of this case, I will not const
ruct any exercises involving it. On the other hand, the function of the last Quenya case we will discuss in this course is relatively well understood. We are talking about:
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 THE INSTRUMENTAL CASE}{\lang3081 
\par The rule for how the instrumental case is constructed can (for pedagogical purposes!) be stated very simply: Just add -}{\b\lang3081 en}{\lang3081  to the dative form! So where the dative has the ending -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 
, corresponding to plural -}{\b\lang3081 in}{\lang3081  and dual -}{\b\lang3081 nt}{\lang3081 , the instrumental has the endings -}{\b\lang3081 nen}{\lang3081 , plural -}{\b\lang3081 inen}{\lang3081 , dual -}{\b\lang3081 nten}{\lang3081 
. Before discussing the function of this case, we will fill in some more details about the instrumental forms as such.
\par \tab We must assume that the basic instrumental ending -}{\b\lang3081 nen}{\lang3081  can be added directly to nouns ending in -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  and -}{\b\lang3081 r}{\lang3081  without creating impossible clusters, so that we could have }{
\b\lang3081 elennen}{\lang3081  as the instrumental form of }{\b\lang3081 elen}{\lang3081  "star", or }{\b\lang3081 Anarnen}{\lang3081  as the instrumental of }{\b\lang3081 Anar}{\lang3081 
 "Sun". (These instrumental forms would of course be accented on the second-to-last syllable because of the consonants cluster -}{\b\lang3081 nn}{\lang3081 - or -}{\b\lang3081 rn}{\lang3081 - now following the vowel of this syllable.) Nouns ending in -}{
\b\lang3081 s}{\lang3081  with stems in -}{\b\lang3081 r}{\lang3081 - (for older -}{\b\lang3081 z}{\lang3081 -) would probably also show -}{\b\lang3081 rn}{\lang3081 - in the instrumental, e.g. }{\b\lang3081 olo}{\b\ul\lang3081 rn}{\b\lang3081 en}{
\lang3081  as the instrumental form of }{\b\lang3081 olos}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 olor}{\lang3081 - "dream". Nouns in -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  with stems in -}{\b\lang3081 m}{\lang3081 - must be assumed to have instrumental forms in -}{\b\lang3081 
mnen}{\lang3081 , e.g. }{\b\lang3081 talamnen}{\lang3081  as the instrumental form of }{\b\lang3081 talan}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 talam}{\lang3081 - "floor". But from this point, we can't be sure. Since the group }{\i\lang3081 ln}{\lang3081 
 regularly becomes }{\b\lang3081 ld}{\lang3081  in Quenya, it could be that the instrumental form of (say) }{\b\lang3081 estel}{\lang3081  "trust, hope" should be ?}{\b\lang3081 estelden}{\lang3081  for older }{\i\lang3081 estelnen}{\lang3081 
. Otherwise, as in the case of nouns in -}{\b\lang3081 t}{\lang3081 , it becomes even more difficult. What is the instrumental form of a noun like }{\b\lang3081 nat}{\lang3081  "thing"? Since **}{\b\lang3081 natnen}{\lang3081 
 is not a possible Quenya form, would it turn into ?}{\b\lang3081 nanten}{\lang3081  with metathesis }{\b\lang3081 tn}{\lang3081  > }{\b\lang3081 nt}{\lang3081 , or would a connecting vowel (possibly -}{\b\lang3081 e}{\lang3081 
-) materialize to produce a form like }{\b\lang3081 natenen}{\lang3081 ? In the case of nouns with special stem-forms ending in consonant clusters, a connecting vowel }{\i\lang3081 must}{\lang3081  be inserted before the ending -}{\b\lang3081 nen}{
\lang3081 ; the instrumental form of }{\b\lang3081 n\'eds}{\lang3081  (}{\b\lang3081 niss}{\lang3081 -) "woman" may be something like }{\b\lang3081 nissenen}{\lang3081 . 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 Some otherwise long-lost final vowel may also be preserved before case-endings, as when }{\b\lang3081 ambar}{\lang3081  "fate, doom" is seen to have the instrumental form }{\b\lang3081 ambart}{
\b\ul\lang3081 a}{\b\lang3081 nen}{\lang3081  (the relevant example is further discussed below). The stem of }{\b\lang3081 ambar}{\lang3081  may be given as }{\b\lang3081 ambart}{\lang3081 (}{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081 )-: Presumably the word did end in -}{
\i\lang3081 rta}{\lang3081  way back in primitive Elvish, but except when shielded by grammatical endings, the final vowel and (later) the -}{\i\lang3081 t}{\lang3081  had been lost.
\par If the plural ending -}{\b\lang3081 inen}{\lang3081  is added to a noun ending in one of the three vowels -}{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081 , -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081 , or -}{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081 , the initial -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 
- of the ending merges with the last vowel of the noun to form a diphthong. Constituting the new second-to-last syllable, it naturally attracts the stress. Thus WJ:391 has }{\b\lang3081 \'f3mainen}{\lang3081  as the plural instrumental form of }{
\b\lang3081 \'f3ma}{\lang3081  "voice", the form }{\b\lang3081 \'f3mainen}{\lang3081  being accented on the diphthong -}{\b\lang3081 ai}{\lang3081 -. Nouns ending in -}{\b\lang3081 \'eb}{\lang3081 
 may originally have behaved in a similar fashion, so that }{\b\lang3081 lass\'eb}{\lang3081  "leaf" once had the plural instrumental form }{\i\lang3081 lasseinen}{\lang3081 , accented on the diphthong }{\i\lang3081 ei}{\lang3081  \endash  but i
n Quenya, older }{\i\lang3081 ei}{\lang3081  eventually turned into a long }{\b\lang3081 \'ed}{\lang3081 , and the Plotz letter points to }{\b\lang3081 lass\'ednen}{\lang3081  as the current form. Of course, this long }{\b\lang3081 \'ed}{\lang3081 
 still attracts the stress, like any long vowel occurring in the second-to-last syllable of a word. It is possible that nouns ending in -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 , like }{\b\lang3081 t\'e1ri}{\lang3081  "queen", would also show }{\b\lang3081 \'ed}{
\lang3081  in their plural instrumental forms, }{\i\lang3081 t\'e1ri+inen}{\lang3081  manifesting as }{\b\lang3081 t\'e1r\'ednen}{\lang3081  since two short }{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 's would merge into one long }{\b\lang3081 \'ed}{\lang3081 
. This plural form }{\b\lang3081 t\'e1r\'ednen}{\lang3081 , accented on the }{\b\lang3081 \'ed}{\lang3081  in the second-to-last syllable, would then contrast with the singular }{\b\lang3081 t\'e1rinen}{\lang3081 , accented on }{\i\lang3081 t\'e1r}{
\lang3081 -. Nouns in -}{\b\lang3081 \'eb}{\lang3081  with stem-forms in -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081  may behave in a similar fashion. The singular instrumental form of the noun }{\b\lang3081 l\'edr\'eb}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 l\'edri}{\lang3081 
- "song" is attested in }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081  as }{\b\lang3081 l\'edrinen}{\lang3081  (this would be simply }{\i\lang3081 l\'edri}{\lang3081 +}{\i\lang3081 nen}{\lang3081 ); perhaps the plural form would be }{\b\lang3081 l\'edr\'ednen}{
\lang3081  (for }{\i\lang3081 l\'edri+inen}{\lang3081 ).}{\b\lang3081 
\par }{\lang3081 For the last time in the course proper I must bore the student with the question of dual forms: }{\i\lang3081 Some}{\lang3081  dual instrumentals have the ending -}{\b\lang3081 nten}{\lang3081  as indicated by Pl
otz, but the dual element is obviously the }{\b\lang3081 t}{\lang3081 , intruding into the simplest instrumental ending -}{\b\lang3081 nen}{\lang3081 . So is the ending -}{\b\lang3081 nten}{\lang3081  peculiar to nouns with nominative dual forms in -}{
\b\lang3081 t}{\lang3081 , so that nouns with nominative dual forms in -}{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081  would rather add the simplest ending -}{\b\lang3081 nen}{\lang3081  after this -}{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081 ? I tend to think so; the instrumental form of }
{\b\lang3081 Aldu}{\lang3081  "Two Trees" would then be }{\b\lang3081 Aldunen}{\lang3081  rather than ?}{\b\lang3081 Aldunten}{\lang3081  (or ?}{\b\lang3081 Aldanten}{\lang3081  or whatever).
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
\par As the name suggests, the }{\i\lang3081 function}{\lang3081  of the instrumental case is to identify the "instrument" (in a wide sense) by which some action is achieved. The best example available is probably the phrase }{\b\lang3081 i carir quettar }{
\b\ul\lang3081 \'f3mainen}{\lang3081  "those who make words }{\ul\lang3081 with voices}{\lang3081 " (WJ:391). This description of the Elves, involving the plural instrumental form of }{\b\lang3081 \'f3ma}{\lang3081  "voice", ident
ifies their voices as the "instrument" or means by which they make words. Lacking an instrumental case, English often uses the preposition "with" instead, as in Tolkiens translation of }{\b\lang3081 \'f3mainen}{\lang3081 
: "with voices". However, it should be understood that the Quenya instrumental endings correspond to English "with" only where this preposition means "using" or "by means of" (}{\b\lang3081 i carir quettar \'f3mai}{\b\ul\lang3081 nen}{\lang3081 
 could also be translated "those who make words }{\ul\lang3081 using}{\lang3081  voices").
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 It is highly unlikely that the endings marking the instru
mental case can be used for English "with" in the sense of "together with" (and please allow me to dwell on this point for a moment, for some writers have actually misapplied the Quenya instrumental case in such a way!) A sentence like "I saw them }{
\ul\lang3081 with}{\lang3081  an Elf" can hardly be translated as **}{\b\lang3081 cennenyet Elda}{\b\ul\lang3081 nen}{\lang3081 
, for to the extent this makes any sense at all, it implies that the Elf is the instrument by which "I saw them"! On the other hand, in a sentence like "I saw them with my binoculars", it would be quite a
ll right to use the instrumental case for the English preposition "with". (Unfortunately, I can't reconstruct the actual Quenya wording, for Tolkien doesn't seem to mention any Elvish word for "binoculars" anywhere: Perhaps the far-sighted Elves just didn
't need such artifices!)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 \tab The Quenya instrumental endings may also be rendered into English by means of other prepositions than "with". The two instrumental forms occurring in }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081 
 Tolkien translated as phrases involving the preposition "in"; yet it is c
lear from the context that the instrumental does not really intrude on the area otherwise covered by the locative. The first instrumental form occurs at the end of the first line of the song: }{\b\lang3081 Ai! lauri\'eb lantar lassi s\'fari}{
\b\ul\lang3081 nen}{\lang3081 , "ah! like gold fall the leaves }{\ul\lang3081 in}{\lang3081  the wind". Despite Tolkien's translation, the context indicates that the "wind" (}{\b\lang3081 s\'far\'eb}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 s\'fari}{\lang3081 
-) is here thought of as the "instrument" }{\i\lang3081 which makes the leaves fall}{\lang3081 : "In the wind" actually implies "by means of the wind", or simply "because of the wi
nd". This example shows that the Quenya instrumental case may indicate simply the }{\i\lang3081 reason}{\lang3081  why something happens (the instrumental ending marking the noun denoting }{\i\lang3081 what}{\lang3081 
 makes it happen). The second example of the instrumental case in }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081  is similar, involving the noun }{\b\lang3081 l\'edr\'eb}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 l\'edri}{\lang3081 
- "song": Quoting from the prose version in RGEO, reference is made to }{\b\lang3081 Vardo...tellumar, yassen tintilar i eleni \'f3maryo l\'edri}{\b\ul\lang3081 nen}{\lang3081 , that is, "Varda's...domes, in which the stars twinkle }{\ul\lang3081 by}{
\lang3081  the song of her voice" (}{\b\lang3081 \'f3maryo l\'edri}{\b\ul\lang3081 nen}{\lang3081  = "her voice's song-}{\ul\lang3081 by}{\lang3081 "). So the song of Varda's voice is }{\i\lang3081 what makes the stars twinkle}{\lang3081 
, and the word for "song" is accordingly marked with the instrumental ending -}{\b\lang3081 nen}{\lang3081 .
\par \tab Another instrumental ending translated "in" by Tolkien is found in }{\i\lang3081 F\'edriel's Song}{\lang3081 , one line of which says that the Valar gave everyone the gifts of Il\'favatar }{\b\lang3081 lesta}{\b\ul\lang3081 nen}{\lang3081  = "}{
\ul\lang3081 in}{\lang3081  measure". Here the instrumental noun tells us something about }{\i\lang3081 how}{\lang3081  the verbal action was accomplished.
\par \tab The }{\i\lang3081 Markirya}{\lang3081  poem includes the plural instrumental form (ending -}{\b\lang3081 inen}{\lang3081 ) of the word }{\b\lang3081 r\'e1ma}{\lang3081 
 "wing", the sails of a ship being poetically referred to as its "wings": The ship is described as }{\b\lang3081 wilwarin wilwa...r\'e1ma}{\b\ul\lang3081 inen}{\b\lang3081  elvi\'eb}{\lang3081 , meaning something like "fluttering like a butterfly...}{
\ul\lang3081 on}{\lang3081  starlike wings" (or, "}{\ul\lang3081 with}{\lang3081  starlike wings", "}{\ul\lang3081 by means of}{\lang3081  starlike wings"). We could imagine a less poetical example using the same plural instrumental form, e.g. }{
\b\lang3081 aiwi vilir r\'e1ma}{\b\ul\lang3081 inen}{\lang3081 , "birds fly }{\ul\lang3081 with}{\lang3081  (or, }{\ul\lang3081 using}{\lang3081 ) wings". Talking about a single bird we could use a }{\i\lang3081 dual instrumental}{\lang3081  form: }{
\b\lang3081 aiw\'eb vil\'eb r\'e1ma}{\b\ul\lang3081 nten}{\lang3081 , "a bird flies }{\ul\lang3081 with}{\lang3081  [a pair of] wings".
\par 
\par One (actually the only) example of an instrumental form occurring in the }{\i\lang3081 Silmarillion}{\lang3081  is particularly interesting. Near the end of chapter 21, }{\i\lang3081 Of T\'farin Turambar}{\lang3081 , N\'edniel refers to her brother as }{
\b\lang3081 Turambar turun ambartanen}{\lang3081 , "master of doom by doom mastered". UT:138 indicates that the more proper reading is }{\b\lang3081 Turambar tur\'fan' ambartanen}{\lang3081 
. This sentence is peculiar for several reasons. The word for "doom" (= "fate") is here }{\b\lang3081 ambar}{\lang3081  with stem }{\b\lang3081 ambart}{\lang3081 (}{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081 )-, as in the name }{\b\lang3081 Turambar}{\lang3081  "mast
er of doom" and the instrumental form }{\b\lang3081 ambartanen}{\lang3081  "by doom". Other sources point to }{\b\lang3081 umbar}{\lang3081  as the Quenya word for "fate, doom" (it is even mentioned in LotR Appendix E as the name of a Tengwa letter). }{
\b\lang3081 Ambar}{\lang3081  elsewhere occurs with the meaning "world", as in Elendil's Declaration in LotR (where reference is made to the }{\b\lang3081 Ambar-metta}{\lang3081  or "end of the world"), but }{\b\lang3081 ambar}{\lang3081 
 "doom" only partially coincides with this noun, since the stem-form }{\b\lang3081 ambart}{\lang3081 (}{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081 )- is distinct. Conceivably the "proper" Quenya word for "doom" was }{\b\lang3081 umbar}{\lang3081 , but the variant form }{
\b\lang3081 ambar}{\lang3081  appeared in Exilic Quenya because of influence from the corresponding Sindarin word (}{\i\lang3081 ammarth}{\lang3081  or }{\i\lang3081 amarth}{\lang3081 
). We must have faith: perhaps Tolkien explains the seeming discrepancies in some still unpublished note.
\par \tab Another peculiar feature of N\'edniel's cry is the word }{\b\lang3081 turun}{\lang3081  or more properly }{\b\lang3081 tur\'fan}{\lang3081 
', translated "mastered". The translation would seem to indicate that this is a passive participle, and the complete form must be }{\b\lang3081 tur\'fana}{\lang3081 , the final -}{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081  here dropping out because the next word (}{
\b\lang3081 ambartanen}{\lang3081 ) begins in the same vowel. This form }{\b\lang3081 tur\'fan}{\lang3081 [}{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081 ] "mastered" must be related to the verb }{\b\lang3081 tur}{\lang3081 
- "govern, control, wield" that we introduced in Lesson Seven. However, according to the rules for the formation of passive participles set out in Lesson Ten, the participle of }{\b\lang3081 tur}{\lang3081 - ought to be }{\b\lang3081 turna}{\lang3081 
 (cf. }{\b\lang3081 carna}{\lang3081  "made" as the attested passive participle of }{\b\lang3081 car}{\lang3081 - "make"), or less likely }{\b\lang3081 t\'farina}{\lang3081  (cf. }{\b\lang3081 r\'e1cina}{\lang3081  "broken" as the attested participle of }
{\b\lang3081 rac}{\lang3081 - "break"). The form }{\b\lang3081 tur\'fan}{\lang3081 [}{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081 ] is quite perplexing. It could belong t
o some peculiar phase in Tolkien's evolution of Quenya, an experiment later abandoned. Since we are dealing with posthumously published material here, we can never be certain that all the linguistic samples represent the Professor's definitive decisions o
n what Quenya grammar was "really" like.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 We must hope that future publications will throw more light upon the strange form }{\b\lang3081 tur\'fan}{\lang3081 [}{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081 
], but if we accept it as some kind of passive participle, we can make out one important grammatical rule from N\'edniel's cry: Following a passive participle, the }{\i\lang3081 agent}{\lang3081 
 who brought about the condition described can be introduced as a noun in the instrumental case. In our attested example, T\'farin Turambar was "mastered", and since N\'edniel wanted to add information about what it was tha
t "mastered" her brother, she used the instrumental form }{\b\lang3081 ambartanen}{\lang3081  = "by doom". A less gloomy example could involve, say, }{\b\lang3081 t\'e9cina}{\lang3081  "written", the passive participle of the verb }{\b\lang3081 tec}{
\lang3081 - "to write": We could build a phrase like }{\b\lang3081 i parma t\'e9cina i Elda}{\b\ul\lang3081 nen}{\lang3081 , "the book written }{\ul\lang3081 by}{\lang3081 
 the Elf". Following a participle, the instrumental form could surely also assume its more basic function of denoting an }{\i\lang3081 instrument}{\lang3081 , so that we could have a phrase like }{\b\lang3081 t\'e9cina quesse}{\b\ul\lang3081 nen}{
\lang3081  "written with a feather [pen]" (}{\b\lang3081 quess\'eb}{\lang3081  = "feather").
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
\par We must assume that the instrumental endings can be added to the relative pronoun }{\b\lang3081 ya}{\lang3081 - to express "by which", "with which": Singular }{\b\lang3081 i cirya }{\b\cf2\lang3081 ya}{\b\cf6\lang3081 nen}{\b\lang3081  lenden amba i s\'ed
r\'eb}{\lang3081  "the ship }{\cf6\lang3081 by}{\lang3081  }{\cf2\lang3081 which}{\lang3081  I went up the river" (}{\b\lang3081 amba}{\lang3081  = "up"), plural }{\b\lang3081 i ciryar }{\b\cf2\lang3081 ya}{\b\cf6\lang3081 inen}{\lang3081 ... "the ships }
{\cf6\lang3081 by}{\lang3081  }{\cf2\lang3081 which}{\lang3081 ...", dual }{\b\lang3081 i ciryat}{\lang3081  }{\b\cf2\lang3081 ya}{\b\cf6\lang3081 nten}{\lang3081 ... "the couple of ships }{\cf6\lang3081 by}{\lang3081  }{\cf2\lang3081 which}{\lang3081 
..."
\par \tab Though our attested examples involve other cases, there is no reason to doubt that also instrumental endings can be combined with possessive pronominal endings \endash  producing forms like }{\b\lang3081 m\'e1nyanen}{\lang3081 
 "with my hand", "using my hand" (}{\b\lang3081 m\'e1}{\lang3081 -}{\b\lang3081 nya}{\lang3081 -}{\b\lang3081 nen}{\lang3081  "hand-my-with").
\par \tab Combined with a }{\i\lang3081 gerund}{\lang3081  (ending in -}{\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081 ), the instrumental case may perhaps express the idea of "by doing so and so", e.g. }{\b\lang3081 tiri\'e9nen}{\lang3081 
 "by watching" (for instance, in a sentence like "I found out by watching"). When the instrumental ending is added to nouns in -}{\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081 
, the vowel in front of the ending would likely be lengthened, thus receiving the accent (a quite awkward stress-pattern being avoided): Hence I go for }{\b\lang3081 tiri\'e9nen}{\lang3081  rather than ?}{\b\lang3081 tirienen}{\lang3081 , w
hich would have to be accented on the second }{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 . We have no attested example involving the instrumental case, but cf. Tolkien's }{\b\lang3081 tyali}{\b\ul\lang3081 \'e9}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081  as the possessive form of }{
\b\lang3081 tyali\'eb}{\lang3081  "play". The instrumental would likely be }{\b\lang3081 tyali}{\b\ul\lang3081 \'e9}{\b\lang3081 nen}{\lang3081 , then. Such vocalic lengthening \endash  apparently to avoid cumbersome stress-patterns \endash 
 is also observed in other parts of speech, as we will discover in the next thrilling section:}{\lang1033 
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 VERBS WITH AN UNACCENTED VOWEL + -}{\b\i\cf2\lang3081 TA}{\cf2\lang3081 
\par }{\lang1033 We have earlier discussed what must be the main categories of Quenya verbs. T
here are some minor sub-groups of verbs that may have their own peculiar features, but our knowledge is very limited since (the litany of Tolkienan linguistics:) we have so few examples. All the same, a few observations about some of these sub-categories 
may be made, and we will deal with one of them here.
\par \tab In some of my examples and exercises I have combined the verb }{\b\lang1033 car}{\lang1033 - "make, do" with an adjective, e.g. exercise }{\i\lang1033 C}{\lang1033  in the previous lesson: }{\b\lang3081 Hiritaryas }{\b\ul\lang3081 carn\'eb}{
\b\lang3081  lierya }{\b\ul\lang3081 alya}{\lang3081 , "his finding it }{\ul\lang3081 made}{\lang3081  his people }{\ul\lang3081 rich}{\lang3081 ". I should point out that we have no Tolkien-made example of an adjective being combined with }{\b\lang3081 
car}{\lang3081 - in such a way, and it may be that I am here imposing an English idiom on Quenya. Now this may not be such a disaster: If we are ever to develop a usable for
m of Quenya, it would almost inevitably become somewhat coloured by modern usage (and if the Eldar return from Valinor to protest against their language being mistreated, that would not be a bad thing, either). Even so, it may be noted that Quenya vocabul
ary includes what may be termed }{\i\lang3081 causative verbs derived from adjectives}{\lang3081 ; perhaps fully "idiomatic" Quenya would rather use such formations.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 These verbs express, in a single word, the idea of "making" an object have the properties described by the corresponding adjective. The student should already be familiar with the ending -}{
\b\lang3081 ta}{\lang3081 , which occurs in many Quenya verbs (e.g. }{\b\lang3081 pusta}{\lang3081 - "to stop"). Often it is just a verbal ending with no particular implications, but occasionally it may take on a }{\i\lang3081 causative}{\lang3081 
 meaning; compare the primary verb }{\b\lang3081 tul}{\lang3081 - "to come" and the derived verb }{\b\lang3081 tulta}{\lang3081 - "to summon" (= to }{\i\lang3081 cause}{\lang3081  to come). Added to }{\i\lang3081 adjectives}{\lang3081 
, it seems that this ending may similarly be used to derive causative verbs. We have only a handful of examples, but the adjective }{\b\lang3081 air\'eb}{\lang3081  "holy" apparently corresponds to a verb }{\b\lang3081 airita}{\lang3081 - "to hallow" 
\endash  that is, "to }{\i\lang3081 make holy}{\lang3081 ". (The final -}{\b\lang3081 \'eb}{\lang3081  of }{\b\lang3081 air}{\b\ul\lang3081 \'eb}{\lang3081  "holy" appears as -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 - in }{\b\lang3081 air}{\b\ul\lang3081 i}{
\b\lang3081 ta}{\lang3081 - because the -}{\b\lang3081 \'eb}{\lang3081  of }{\b\lang3081 air\'eb}{\lang3081  descends from -}{\i\lang3081 i}{\lang3081  in the primitive language, and it changed to -}{\b\lang3081 \'eb}{\lang3081  only when final. Cf. the 
similar variation in the aorist: }{\b\lang3081 sil}{\b\ul\lang3081 \'eb}{\lang3081  "shines", but with a plural subject }{\b\lang3081 sil}{\b\ul\lang3081 i}{\b\lang3081 r}{\lang3081 
 "shine", because if you add any ending the final vowel is no longer final at all.)
\par The one form of the verb }{\b\lang3081 airita}{\lang3081 - that is actually attested is the past tense. It reportedly appears as }{\b\lang3081 airit\'e1n\'eb}{\lang3081 
 in an unpublished Tolkien manuscript stored at the Bodleian: According to a footnote in }{\i\lang3081 Vinyar Tengwar}{\lang3081  #32, November 1993, p. 7, the manuscript page in question "dates to c. 1
966 and gives much information about Quenya verbs. It will be published in an upcoming issue of }{\i\lang3081 Vinyar Tengwar}{\lang3081 ." Eight years and nine }{\i\lang3081 Vinyar Tengwar}{\lang3081 
s later, we are unfortunately still waiting to see this apparently highly interesting document \endash  but at least VT#32 cited the past tense }{\b\lang3081 airit\'e1n\'eb}{\lang3081 . It obviously includes the well-known past tense ending -}{
\b\lang3081 n\'eb}{\lang3081 , but it should be noted that }{\i\lang3081 the vowel of the ending -}{\b\i\lang3081 ta}{\i\lang3081 - is here lengthened}{\lang3081  when the past tense ending is added. In this way, the now long syllable -}{\b\lang3081 t\'e1
}{\lang3081 - attracts the stress. **}{\b\lang3081 Airitan\'eb}{\lang3081  with no lengthening would have a rather awkward stress-pattern (accented on -}{\i\lang3081 rit}{\lang3081 
-), and it is perhaps for this reason the lengthening occurs. This may also imply that if some further ending is added after -}{\b\lang3081 n\'eb}{\lang3081  so that the stress would not threaten to land on -}{\i\lang3081 rit}{\lang3081 
- after all, the lengthening of -}{\b\lang3081 ta}{\lang3081 - may not occur: Perhaps, say, "we hallowed" is }{\b\lang3081 airitanelm\'eb}{\lang3081  rather than ?}{\b\lang3081 airit\'e1nelm\'eb}{\lang3081 , since the stress must here fall on -}{
\b\lang3081 ne}{\lang3081 - and -}{\b\lang3081 ta}{\lang3081 - receives no stress at all. Some think Quenya cannot have a long vowel in a wholly unaccented syllable unless this syllable is also the first one of the word.
\par Whatever the case may be, we can apparently infer this rule: As long as the past tense form of such a verb (that is, a verb with an }{\i\lang3081 unaccented vowel}{\lang3081  in front of the verbal ending -}{\b\lang3081 ta}{\lang3081 
) is not to receive any further endings that may shift the stress, the ending -}{\b\lang3081 ta}{\lang3081  is lengthened to -}{\b\lang3081 t\'e1}{\lang3081 - when the past tense ending -}{\b\lang3081 n\'eb}{\lang3081  is added after it: Thus }{
\b\lang3081 airit}{\b\ul\lang3081 \'e1}{\b\lang3081 n\'eb}{\lang3081  as the pa.t. of }{\b\lang3081 airita}{\lang3081 -. Of course, not all endings that may be suffixed to -}{\b\lang3081 n\'eb}{\lang3081 
 have the power to shift the stress, and then the lengthening of -}{\b\lang3081 t\'e1}{\lang3081 - must remain to prevent the accent from going someplace it shouldn't: }{\b\lang3081 Airit\'e1ner}{\lang3081  "hallowed" (with a plural subject), }{
\b\lang3081 airit\'e1nes}{\lang3081  "(s)he hallowed", }{\b\lang3081 airit\'e1nen}{\lang3081  "I hallowed". But quite possibly, it should be }{\b\lang3081 airit}{\b\ul\lang3081 a}{\b\lang3081 neny\'eb}{\lang3081  with no lengthening of -}{\b\lang3081 t
\'e1}{\lang3081 - if you use the longer form of the ending for "I" \endash  so that the stress moves to -}{\b\lang3081 ne}{\lang3081 -, and -}{\b\lang3081 ta}{\lang3081 - becomes a wholly unaccented syllable.
\par In the }{\i\lang3081 Etymologies}{\lang3081 , Tolkien listed at least one more verb that seems to belong to this class. The entry }{\i\lang3081 NIK-W-}{\lang3081  provides a verb }{\b\lang3081 ninquit\'e1}{\lang3081 
- "whiten", i.e. "make white", derived from the adjective "white": }{\b\lang3081 ninqu\'eb}{\lang3081  (stem }{\b\lang3081 ninqui}{\lang3081 -; the primitive form is given as }{\i\lang3081 ninkwi}{\lang3081 ). By writing }{\b\lang3081 ninquit\'e1}{
\lang3081 -, Tolkien obviously suggested that the final vowel is often long, and we may safely assume that the past tense is }{\b\lang3081 ninquit\'e1n\'eb}{\lang3081 . 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs20\lang3081 NOTE: In the entry }{\i\fs20\lang3081 NIK-W}{\fs20\lang3081 -, Tolkien also listed a verb }{\b\fs20\lang3081 ninquita}{\fs20\lang3081 - "shine white" that would probably inflect otherwis
e: perhaps the past tense would rather be ?}{\b\fs20\lang3081 ninquint\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  with nasal infixion (allow me to state explicitly that this is speculation!) In the aorist, the two verbs must probably coincide as }{\b\fs20\lang3081 ninquita}{
\fs20\lang3081 , the context determining whether this is to be interpreted "whitens" or "shines white".
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\lang3081 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 We may be able to tell one more thing about this class of verbs: how the passive (or "past") participle is formed. The evidence is widely scattered, though. 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 In }{\i\lang1033 The Houses of Healing}{\lang1033 , Chapter 8 of Book Five in }{\i\lang1033 The Return of the King}{\lang1033 , Tolkien has Aragorn saying that "in the high tongue of old I am }{
\i\lang1033 Elessar}{\lang1033 , the Elfstone, and }{\i\lang1033 Envinyatar}{\lang1033 , the Renewer". The Quenya title }{\b\lang1033 Envinyatar}{\lang1033  = "Renewer" is interesting. As for the final -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 
 seen here, this ending may be added to (A-stem) Quenya verbs with much the same meaning as the English agent ending -}{\i\lang1033 er}{\lang1033 , so }{\b\lang1033 Envinyata}{\b\ul\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  "Renew}{\ul\lang1033 er}{\lang1033 
" points to an underlying verb }{\b\lang1033 envinyata}{\lang1033 - "to renew". The prefix }{\b\lang1033 en}{\lang1033 - means "re-", and }{\b\lang1033 vinya}{\lang1033  is the Quenya adjective "new", so apparently we are looking at another verb der
ived from an adjective by means of the ending -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033 .
\par Interestingly, what may be seen as the passive participle of this verb }{\b\lang1033 envinyata}{\lang1033 - "to renew" is attested in MR:405, in the phrase }{\b\lang1033 Arda Envinyanta}{\lang1033 
. This Tolkien translated "Arda Healed" (the reference is to a future world healed from the consequences of the evil of Morgoth). Comparing it with Aragorn's title }{\b\lang1033 Envinyatar}{\lang1033  = "Renewer", we can tell that }{\b\lang1033 
Arda Envinyanta}{\lang1033  more literally means "Arda Renewed". It should be noted how the passive participle is formed: by }{\i\lang1033 nasal-infixion}{\lang1033  intruding before the }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  of the ending -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{
\lang1033  of the verb }{\b\lang1033 envinyata}{\lang1033 -. The resulting form }{\b\lang1033 envinya}{\b\ul\lang1033 n}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033  differs from the passive participles of "normal" verbs in -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033 
, which seem to have participles in -}{\b\lang1033 taina}{\lang1033 . (Compare }{\b\lang1033 hastaina}{\lang1033  "marred" from the same text that provides the example }{\b\lang1033 Arda Envinyanta}{\lang1033  "Arda Healed": }{\b\lang1033 Arda Hastaina}{
\lang1033  or "Arda Marred" was the world as it actually appeared, marred by Morgoth. See MR:
405, cf. 408, note 14. It is important to notice that these divergent types of participles occur in the same source text, allowing us to know with certainty that the different formations do belong to the same version of Quenya: Otherwise, it would be temp
ting to dismiss some of the formations as representing merely a certain stage in Tolkien's evolution of the language \endash  ideas he later abandoned.)
\par If }{\b\lang1033 envinyata}{\lang1033 - "to renew" has the passive participle }{\b\lang1033 envinyanta}{\lang1033 , we may plausibly assume that the pass. part. of }{\b\lang1033 airita}{\lang1033 
- "to hallow" is similarly formed by means of nasal-infixion: }{\b\lang1033 airinta}{\lang1033  "hallowed" (rather than ?}{\b\lang1033 airitaina}{\lang1033 , though perhaps this form would also be acceptable). And if }{\b\lang1033 airita}{\lang1033 
- has the past tense form }{\b\lang1033 airit\'e1n\'eb}{\lang1033  with lengthening of -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033 - to -}{\b\lang1033 t\'e1}{\lang1033 -, we can probably assume that }{\b\lang1033 envinyata}{\lang1033 - "to renew" becomes }{\b\lang1033 
envinyat\'e1n\'eb}{\lang1033  in the past tense. Similarly, if }{\b\lang1033 ninquit\'e1}{\lang1033 - is the verb "to whiten", with the past tense }{\b\lang1033 ninquit\'e1n\'eb}{\lang1033 , the participle "whitened" may well be }{\b\lang1033 ninquinta}{
\lang1033 . (The forms }{\b\lang1033 envinyanta}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 airinta}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ninquinta}{\lang1033  would of course agree in number like adjectives in -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 , changing this final vowel to -}{
\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  in the plural.)
\par We have mentioned pretty much all the very few known verbs that may tentatively be assigned to this sub-class. There is no direct evidence for how they would behave in other forms than the past tense and the passive participle. (As for the }{\i\lang1033 
active}{\lang1033  participle in -}{\b\lang1033 la}{\lang1033 , we would almost certainly see the same lengthening of the ending -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033  as we observe before the past tense ending -}{\b\lang1033 n\'eb}{\lang1033 : hence }{
\b\lang1033 airit\'e1la}{\lang1033  "hallowing", }{\b\lang1033 envinyat\'e1la}{\lang1033  "renewing". Again, the "motivation" for lengthening the vowel of -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033  would be to achieve euphonic stress-patterns.)
\par It is of course difficult to know to what extent we should feel free to derive new Quenya verbs ourselves by adding -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033  to adjectives (remembering that adjectives in -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  change this vowel to -}{
\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 - before endings, as in }{\b\lang1033 airita}{\lang1033 - "to hallow" from }{\b\lang1033 air\'eb}{\lang1033  "holy"). To return to the sentence we started with, }{\b\lang1033 hiritaryas carn\'eb lierya alya}{\lang1033 
 "his finding it made his people rich", perhaps this might better be expressed as }{\b\lang1033 hiritaryas alyat\'e1n\'eb lierya}{\lang1033 ? We then assume that the adjective }{\b\lang1033 alya}{\lang1033 - can be used as the basis for a verb }{
\b\lang1033 alyata}{\lang1033 - "make rich" or "enrich", with past tense }{\b\lang1033 alyat\'e1n\'eb}{\lang1033  (and passive participle }{\b\lang1033 alyanta}{\lang1033 
). In this as in other matters, people who want to write in Quenya face a difficult choice: Should we try to make the language work using solely the words Tolkien himself provided, introducing unattested idioms or long circumlocutions where necessary to w
o
rk around gaps in the Tolkien-made vocabulary? Or should we feel free to derive new words from Tolkienian elements by applying the Professor's principles as far as we understand them, something that may be perceived as diluting Tolkien's actual linguistic
 output with "fake" elements (however cleverly constructed)? Some post-Tolkien creativity must unquestionably be allowed if we are ever to develop Quenya into anything like a useable language, but there are no easy answers here.
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\cf2\lang3081 THE IMPERATIVE
\par }{\lang1033 The }{\i\lang1033 imperative}{\lang1033 
 is a form of the verb used to express commands or requests. In English, imperatives are often preceded by the word "please" to make them more polite, but it should be understood that an imperative form as such is not necessarily to be taken as a blunt }{
\i\lang1033 order}{\lang1033 . In Tolkien's Quenya rendering of the Lord's Prayer, several imperatives occur, and such a prayer as "deliver us from evil" is of course just that \endash  a prayer, not an attempt to order God around.
\par \tab According to Tolkien, the primitive Elvish language had an }{\i\lang1033 imperative}{\lang1033  }{\i\lang1033 particle}{\lang1033 
 that could be used in conjunction with a verbal stem to indicate that it was to be taken as an imperative. The particle had the form }{\i\lang1033 \'e2}{\lang1033 
, and it was "originally independent and variable in place" (WJ:365). Sometimes it was placed }{\i\lang1033 after}{\lang1033  the stem, and in such cases it came out as an ending -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 
 in Quenya. WJ:364 mentions an "imperative exclamation" }{\b\lang1033 heca!}{\lang1033  meaning "be gone!" or "stand aside!" \endash  and on the next page, this is suggested to come from the  primitive phrase }{\i\lang1033 hek(e) \'e2}{\lang1033 
. There is also the primitive exclamation }{\i\lang1033 el-\'e2}{\lang1033 , "lo!", "look!", "see!", which is supposed to be the very first thing the Elves ever said as they awoke at Cuivi\'e9
nen and first saw the stars (WJ:360). In Quenya, this word came out as }{\b\lang1033 ela!}{\lang1033  It was "an imperative exclamation directing sight to an actually visible object" (WJ:362).
\par \tab If we were to be guided by examples like }{\b\lang1033 heca}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 ela}{\lang1033 , we would have to conclude that in the case of primary verbs at least, imperatives may be formed by adding -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 
 to the verbal stem. For instance, }{\b\lang1033 tir}{\lang1033 - "to watch" would have the imperative }{\b\lang1033 tira!}{\lang1033  "watch!", representing primitive }{\i\lang1033 tir-\'e2}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 tir(i) \'e2}{\lang1033 
. The corresponding Sindarin form }{\i\lang1033 tiro!}{\lang1033  is actually attested. (Notice that the imperative }{\b\lang1033 tira}{\lang1033  "watch!" would be distinct from the present/continuative form }{\b\lang1033 t\'edra}{\lang1033 
 "is watching", since in the latter form, the stem-vowel is lengthened.) This may be one way of constructing Quenya imperatives, but it is also possible that exclamations like }{\b\lang1033 heca}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 ela}{\lang1033 
 are to be taken as "fossilized" forms descending from earlier stages of Elvish.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 As for the typical "modern" way of forming imperatives, there is some evidence that a descendant of the original particle }{\i\lang1033 \'e2}{\lang1033 
 was still treated as an independent word: it was placed }{\i\lang1033 in front of}{\lang1033  the verbal stem instead of being suffixed as an e
nding. In the LotR itself, an example is provided by the Cormallen Praise, the crowd hailing Frodo and Sam with the words }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 a laita te}{\lang1033\cgrid0 ... }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 Cormacolindor, a laita t\'e1rienna!}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 "Bless them... The Ring bearers, bless (or praise) them to the height" (translated in }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 Letters}{\lang1033\cgrid0 :308). Notice how the verbal stem }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 laita}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
- "bless, praise" is here preceded by the imperative particle }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 a}{\lang1033\cgrid0  to form an imperative phrase }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 a laita!}{\lang1033\cgrid0  "bless!" or "praise!" The particle }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 a}{
\lang1033\cgrid0  also appears in the long form }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 \'e1}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , directly from primitive }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 \'e2}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , as in the exclamation }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 \'e1 vala Manw\'eb!}{\lang1033\cgrid0  "may Manw
\'eb order it!" (WJ:404). Here, the verb }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 vala}{\lang1033\cgrid0 - "rule, govern" (the origin of the noun }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 Valar}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 and in later usage therefore referring to "divine" power only) is combined with the imperative particle }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 \'e1}{\lang1033\cgrid0 : The literal meaning of }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 \'e1 vala Manw\'eb!}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 is transparently something like "do rule Manw\'eb!", if we make an effort to translate }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 \'e1}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 as a separate word.  Incidentally, this example demonstrates that the subject of the imperative (the one who is to carry out the "order" or request) may be explicitly mentioned after the imperative phrase proper.
\par Is there any reason why the imperative particle appears in the short form }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 a}{\lang1033\cgrid0  in }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 a laita}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , but in the long form }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 \'e1}{\lang1033\cgrid0  in }{
\b\lang1033\cgrid0 \'e1 vala}{\lang1033\cgrid0 ? It has been suggested that }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 \'e1}{\lang1033\cgrid0  is shortened to }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 a}{\lang1033\cgrid0  whenever it occurs in front of a }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 long syllable}{
\lang1033\cgrid0  (like }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 lai}{\lang1033\cgrid0 -, because of the diphthong }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 ai}{\lang1033\cgrid0 ), but we cannot be sure. Perhaps }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 \'e1}{\lang1033\cgrid0  vs. }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 a}{
\lang1033\cgrid0  is just an example of random variation: Presumably being unaccented, the particle could well tend to become shortened if speakers don't enunciate with care (the 
ecstatic crowds at Cormallen, hailing the hobbits who had saved the world, hardly did!) I would normally prefer the long form }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 \'e1}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , avoiding confusion with }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 a}{\lang1033\cgrid0  as a particle of 
}{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 address}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , like English "o" (as in Treebeard's greeting to Celeborn and Galadriel: }{\b\ul\lang1033\cgrid0 a}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0  vanimar}{\lang1033\cgrid0  = "}{\ul\lang1033\cgrid0 o}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 beautiful ones", Letters:308). For instance, since the verb "to go" is }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 lelya}{\lang1033\cgrid0 -, the imperative "go!" would be }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 \'e1 lelya!
\par }{\lang1033\cgrid0 The imperative particle }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 \'e1}{\lang1033\cgrid0  can also be combined with the negation }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 v\'e1}{\lang1033\cgrid0  to form the word }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 \'e1va}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , used in }{
\i\lang1033\cgrid0 negative}{\lang1033\cgrid0  commands: }{\b\ul\lang1033\cgrid0 \'c1va}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0  car\'eb!}{\lang1033\cgrid0  "}{\ul\lang1033\cgrid0 Don't}{\lang1033\cgrid0  do [it]!" (WJ:371). This example also gives away how }{
\i\lang1033\cgrid0 primary}{\lang1033\cgrid0  verbs behave in imperative phrases: they appear with the ending -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 \'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
, just like they do when they are used as infinitives (and ending-less aorist forms). So from a primary verb like }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 tir}{\lang1033\cgrid0 - "watch", we can probably form a command like }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 \'e1 tir\'eb!}{
\lang1033\cgrid0  "(do) watch!" \endash  negative }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 \'e1va tir\'eb!}{\lang1033\cgrid0  "don't watch!"
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 THE }{\b\i\cf2\lang3081 NAI}{\b\cf2\lang3081  FORMULA
\par }{\lang1033 If one does not want to issue a }{\i\lang1033 command}{\lang1033  (however polite), but is merely expressing a }{\i\lang1033 wish}{\lang1033  that something will be done or will happen, Quenya has a special "wishing formula".
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Near the end of }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 , we find these lines: }{\b\lang1033 Nai hiruvaly\'eb Valimar! Nai ely\'eb hiruva!}{\lang1033 
 In LotR, this is translated "maybe thou wilt find Valimar! Maybe even thou wilt find it!" The word }{\b\lang1033 nai}{\lang1033  is here rendered into English a
s "maybe", but elsewhere, Tolkien indicated that this Quenya word does not merely imply that something is }{\i\lang1033 possible}{\lang1033 . He noted that }{\b\lang1033 nai}{\lang1033 
 "expresses rather a wish than a hope, and would be more closely rendered 'may it be that' (thou wilt find), than by 'maybe.'" (RGEO:68) We may wonder why he used the "misleading" translation }{\i\lang1033 maybe}{\lang1033 
 in the first place; possibly there are some "conceptual developments" involved here (i.e., Tolkien changed his mind about the precise meaning of a Quenya text he had already published!) Anyway, his final decision on the meaning of the phrase }{
\b\ul\lang1033 nai}{\b\lang1033  hiruvaly\'eb Valimar}{\lang1033  was that it is to be interpreted "}{\ul\lang1033 be it that}{\lang1033  thou wilt find Valimar" or "}{\ul\lang1033 may}{\lang1033  thou find Valimar". }{\b\ul\lang1033 Nai}{\b\lang1033  ely
\'eb hiruva}{\lang1033  likewise means "}{\ul\lang1033 be it that}{\lang1033  even thou wilt find [it]". (The word }{\b\lang1033 ely\'eb}{\lang1033  "even thou" here occurring is an emphatic, independent pronoun corresponding to the ending -}{\b\lang1033 
ly\'eb}{\lang1033  "thou, you", whereas }{\b\lang1033 Valimar}{\lang1033  here stands as an alternative to }{\b\lang1033 Valinor}{\lang1033 : Galadriel singing }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 
 thus expresses a wish that Frodo will eventually "find" or come to the Blessed Realm \endash  and as we remember, both he and Galadriel herself went over the Sea in the end.)
\par We have one more attestation of the }{\b\lang1033 nai}{\lang1033  wishing-formula. It occurs in }{\i\lang1033 Cirion's Oath}{\lang1033 , Cirion expressing a wish that the Valar will guard the oath: }{\b\ul\lang1033 Nai}{\b\lang1033  tiruvantes}{\lang1033 
, "}{\ul\lang1033 be it that}{\lang1033  they will guard [/watch over] it". Tolkien noted that this is the equivalent of "may they guard it" (UT:305, 317).
\par As for the basic meaning of the word }{\b\lang1033 nai}{\lang1033  itself, Tolkien implied that it is quite literally "be (it) that": He derived Quenya }{\b\lang1033 nai}{\lang1033  from earlier }{\i\lang1033 n\'e2-i}{\lang1033  (RGEO:68). The }{
\i\lang1033 n\'e2}{\lang1033  part would seem to be the element meaning "be!", undoubtedly closely related to the Quenya copula }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033  "is", itself a form of the verb "to be". The final }{\i\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 
 must be the element corresponding to the "that" of "be (it) that", and this }{\i\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  is certainly meant to be related to the Quenya article }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  "the".
\par Whatever the precise origin or basic meaning of }{\b\lang1033 nai}{\lang1033  may be, it is a useful word that can apparently be put in front of any sentence including a future-tense verb, turning a simple statement about the future into a }{\i\lang1033 
wish}{\lang1033  about what the future may bring: 
\par \'a4 }{\b\lang1033 Elda tuluva coalmanna}{\lang1033  "an Elf will come to our house" > }{\b\lang1033 Nai Elda tuluva coalmanna!}{\lang1033 
 "be it that an Elf will come to our house!" = "(I) wish that an Elf will come to our house!" or "may an Elf come to our house!"
\par \'a4 }{\b\lang1033 Hiruvan i malta}{\lang1033  "I will find the gold" > }{\b\lang1033 Nai hiruvan i malta!}{\lang1033  "be it that I will find gold!" = "wish that I will find the gold!"
\par \'a4 }{\b\lang1033 Caruvantes}{\lang1033  "they will do it" > }{\b\lang1033 nai caruvantes!}{\lang1033  "be it that they will do it!" = "wish that they will do it!"
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par In Peter Jackson's }{\i\lang1033 The Fellowship of the Ring}{\lang1033 , Saruman can be heard uttering an example of the }{\b\lang1033 nai}{\lang1033 
 formula in the scene where he stands on the top of Orthanc reading invocations intended to bring down an avalanche on the Fellowship. He cries to the mountain: }{\b\lang1033 Nai yarvax\'eba rasselya taltuva notto-carinnar!}{\lang1033 
 = "Wish that your blood-stained horn will collapse upon enemy heads!" (The actor pauses before }{\b\lang1033 taltuva}{\lang1033 
 "will collapse"; Christopher Lee playing Saruman may not have understood that he was uttering a single sentence rather than two!)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 In our attested examples, }{\b\lang1033 nai}{\lang1033  is combined with the future tense, but since we have only three examples, it certainly cannot be ruled out that }{\b\lang1033 nai}{
\lang1033  may be used in conjunction with other tenses as well. (One may even say we have only }{\i\lang1033 two}{\lang1033  examples,}{\i\lang1033  Cirion's Oath}{\lang1033  + }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 , since the two examples of the }{
\b\lang1033 nai}{\lang1033  formula near the end of }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  are very similar.) Perhaps }{\b\lang1033 nai}{\lang1033 
 can also describe the speaker's hope that a certain wish is already being fulfilled, or has been fulfilled in the past \endash  the speaker still not knowing whether the wish came true or not. If so, we could have constructions like }{\b\lang1033 nai t
\'edras}{\lang1033  "be it that (s)he is watching" = "I hope (s)he is watching" (with the present or continuative tense of }{\b\lang1033 tir}{\lang1033 - "watch"), }{\b\lang1033 nai hirnentes!}{\lang1033 
 "be it that they found it" = "I hope they found it" (with the past tense of }{\b\lang1033 hir}{\lang1033 - "find"), or }{\b\lang1033 nai ut\'falies}{\lang1033  "be it that (s)he has come" = "I hope (s)he's come" (with the perfect tense of }{\b\lang1033 
tul}{\lang1033 - "come"). However, in the exercises below, }{\b\lang1033 nai}{\lang1033  is only combined with the future tense \endash  as in our attested examples.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\i\cf2\lang3081 Summary of Lesson Sixteen:}{\lang3081  The }{\i\lang3081 instrumental}{\lang3081  case has the basic ending -}{\b\lang3081 nen}{\lang3081 , plural -}{\b\lang3081 inen}{\lang3081 , dual -}{\b\lang3081 nten}{\lang3081 
 (at least in the case of nouns with nominative dual forms in -}{\b\lang3081 t}{\lang3081 ; nouns with dual forms in -}{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081  may just add the simplest ending -}{\b\lang3081 nen}{\lang3081 
 to this vowel). The instrumental ending is added to nouns denoting the "instrument" or means by which some action is done or accomplished, as when Elves are described as making words }{\b\lang3081 \'f3ma}{\b\ul\lang3081 inen}{\lang3081  = "}{
\ul\lang3081 with}{\lang3081  voices" (}{\b\lang3081 \'f3ma}{\lang3081  "voice"). The instrumental ending may correspond to such English prepositions as "with" or "by" where these words mean "us
ing", "by means of". Sometimes the instrumental ending may mark a noun simply indicating }{\i\lang3081 what}{\lang3081  makes something happen, as when the first line of }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081  says leaves fall }{\b\lang3081 s\'fari}{
\b\ul\lang3081 nen}{\lang3081  = "}{\ul\lang3081 in}{\lang3081  the wind", i.e., because of the wind. Following a passive participle, a noun in the instrumental case may indicate who or what brought about the situation described, as when T\'fa
rin is described as }{\b\lang3081 tur\'fan' }{\b\i\lang3081 ambarta}{\b\i\ul\lang3081 nen}{\lang3081 , "mastered }{\i\ul\lang3081 by}{\i\lang3081  doom}{\lang3081 ". \endash  Verbs including an unaccented vowel + the ending -}{\b\lang3081 ta}{\lang3081 
 seem to have past-tense forms in -}{\b\lang3081 t\'e1n\'eb}{\lang3081  (notice the long }{\b\lang3081 \'e1}{\lang3081 ) and passive participles in -}{\b\lang3081 nta}{\lang3081 . Attested examples include }{\b\lang3081 airit\'e1n\'eb}{\lang3081 
, past tense of }{\b\lang3081 airita}{\lang3081 - "to hallow", and }{\b\lang3081 envinyanta}{\lang3081 , passive participle of }{\b\lang3081 envinyata}{\lang3081 - "to renew, heal". These verbs are }{\i\lang3081 causative}{\lang3081 
 formations derived from adjectives by means of the ending -}{\b\lang3081 ta}{\lang3081 , as when }{\b\lang3081 air\'eb}{\lang3081  (}{\b\lang3081 airi}{\lang3081 -) "holy" is the basis of the causative verb }{\b\lang3081 airita}{\lang3081 
- "to make holy" = "to hallow". \endash  Quenya }{\i\lang3081 imperatives}{\lang3081  are marked by the particle }{\b\lang3081 \'e1}{\lang3081  (variant }{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081 , negative }{\b\lang3081 \'e1va}{\lang3081 
 "don't"), which is placed in front of the verbal stem: }{\b\lang3081 A laita}{\lang3081  = "(do) praise!", }{\b\lang3081 \'e1 vala}{\lang3081  "(do) rule!" In this grammatical context, the stem of primary verbs assume the ending -}{\b\lang3081 \'eb}{
\lang3081 , as in the negative command }{\b\lang3081 \'e1va car\'eb}{\lang3081  "don't do [it]!" A few (old, fossilized?) imperative forms are seen to replace the independent imperative particle }{\b\lang3081 \'e1}{\lang3081  or }{\b\lang3081 a}{
\lang3081  with the corresponding }{\i\lang3081 ending}{\lang3081  -}{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081  (}{\b\lang3081 ela}{\lang3081  "lo! behold!", }{\b\lang3081 heca!}{\lang3081  "be gone!") \endash  The word }{\b\lang3081 nai}{\lang3081 
, meaning "be it that...", can be placed at the beginning of a sentence to express a }{\i\lang3081 wish}{\lang3081 : }{\b\lang3081 Nai tiruvantes}{\lang3081  "be it that they will guard it" or "may they guard it" (cf. }{\b\lang3081 tiruvantes}{\lang3081 
 "they will guard/watch it"). In our attested examples, }{\b\lang3081 nai}{\lang3081  is placed in front of sentences including a future-tense verb; whether }{\b\lang3081 nai}{\lang3081  can be combined with other tenses is unclear.
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 VOCABULARY}{\lang3081 
\par 
\par }{\b\lang3081 nelya}{\lang3081  "third" }{\fs20\lang3081 (The original name of the Third Clan of the Elves was }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Nelyar}{\fs20\lang3081 , literally "Thirds, Third Ones", though the Eldarin branch of that clan would later be called }{
\b\fs20\lang3081 Lindar}{\fs20\lang3081  or }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Teleri}{\fs20\lang3081  instead [WJ:380, 382].)
\par }{\b\lang3081 \'e1}{\lang3081  imperative particle }{\fs20\lang3081 (variant }{\b\fs20\lang3081 a}{\fs20\lang3081 , but we will use }{\b\fs20\lang3081 \'e1}{\fs20\lang3081  here)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 \'e1va}{\lang3081  "don't!" }{\fs20\lang3081 (i.e., the imperative particle combined with a negation. Also in the form }{\b\fs20\lang3081 av\'e1}{\fs20\lang3081 
, the sole attested two-syllable Quenya word that is definitely known to be accented on the }{\i\fs20\lang3081 last}{\fs20\lang3081  syllable [WJ:371] \endash  but we will use }{\b\fs20\lang3081 \'e1va}{\fs20\lang3081  here.)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 rac}{\lang3081 - "to break"
\par }{\b\lang3081 envinyata}{\lang3081 - "to renew"
\par }{\b\lang3081 airita}{\lang3081 - "to hallow"
\par }{\b\lang3081 harna}{\lang3081 - "to wound" }{\fs20\lang3081 (and the passive participle is evidently also }{\b\fs20\lang3081 harna}{\fs20\lang3081 , defined as "wounded" in the entry }{\i\fs20\lang3081 SKAR }{\fs20\lang3081 in the }{\i\fs20\lang3081 
Etymologies}{\fs20\lang3081 . The adjectival or participial formation }{\b\fs20\lang3081 harna}{\fs20\lang3081  "wounded" is the primary derivative from the original root; eventually }{\b\fs20\lang3081 harna}{\fs20\lang3081 
- also came to be used as a verbal stem "to wound". Of course, if this word were to go like a regular A-stem verb, the passive participle should then be ?}{\b\fs20\lang3081 harnaina}{\fs20\lang3081 . But the ending -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 ina}{\fs20\lang3081 
 is just a longer variant of the ending -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 na}{\fs20\lang3081  which is present from the beginning, and suffixing it twice to the same word should hardly be necessary!)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 namba}{\lang3081  "hammer"
\par }{\b\lang3081 eht\'eb}{\lang3081  "spear"
\par }{\b\lang3081 y\'e1na}{\lang3081  "holy place, sanctuary"}{
\par }{\b nilm\'eb}{\lang3081  "friendship"
\par }{\b\lang3081 R\'f3men}{\lang3081  "the East" }{\fs20\lang3081 (the initial }{\b\fs20\lang3081 r\'f3}{\fs20\lang3081 - is ultimately related to the }{\b\fs20\lang3081 or}{\fs20\lang3081 - of the verb }{\b\fs20\lang3081 orta}{\fs20\lang3081 
- "rise", since the Sun rises in the East.)}{\lang3081 
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 EXERCISES
\par }{\lang3081 
\par 1. Translate into English:
\par 
\par }{\i\lang3081 A}{\lang3081 . }{\b\lang3081 Ut\'falies R\'f3mello ninqu\'eb rocconen.}{\i\lang3081 
\par B.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 I n\'e9r harnan\'eb i r\'e1 ehtenen, ar eques: "\'c1va mat\'eb yondonya!"}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 C.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Quentemm\'eb i Eldanna: "Nilmelma n\'e1 envinyanta annalyanen!"}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 D.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 I nelya auress\'eb quentes i vendenna: "\'c1 car\'eb ya merily\'eb!"}{\i\lang3081 
\par E.}{\b\lang3081  Quen um\'eb pol\'eb hir\'eb harma nurtaina Naucoinen, an Nauco mel\'eb n\'farav\'eb i malta ya haryas.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 F.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 I n\'e9r n\'e1 harna rassenten i lamno; nai \'favas fir\'eb!
\par }{\i\lang3081 G.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Lind\'ebas alassenen.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 H.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 \'c1 lelya i ostonna ar \'e1 quet\'eb i taura t\'e1rinna: "Nai varyuvaly\'eb n\'f3relma i \'fami\'eb ohtarillon!"}{\lang3081 
\par 
\par 2. Translate into Quenya (consistently using the independent imperative particle rather than the ending -}{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081 , which possibly only occurs in fossilized forms):
\par 
\par }{\i\lang3081 I.}{\lang3081  He said to the Dwarf: "Break the cup with a hammer!"
\par }{\i\lang3081 J.}{\lang3081  By ship I went away [past tense of }{\b\lang3081 auta}{\lang3081 -] to a remote land in the East.
\par }{\i\lang3081 K.}{\lang3081  The city is protected by great walls, and warriors who fight with spears cannot break the walls.}{\b\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 L}{\lang3081 . Calandil said to his wounded son: "Don't die!"}{\b\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 M.}{\lang3081  May your queen find the sanctuary hallowed by the Elves!}{\fs20\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 N}{\lang3081 . The king and the queen went to my house and renewed our }{\i\lang3081 (excl.)}{\lang3081  friendship with great gifts.
\par }{\i\lang3081 O.}{\lang3081  She seizes the boy with her hands }{\i\lang3081 (dual)}{\lang3081 , and she says: "Don't go to the river!"
\par }{\i\lang3081 P}{\lang3081 . The woman who lives (/dwells) in the third house in the street said to the Elf: "Watch the men who are coming from the sanctuary that you see on the hill, the ones who go to the east."
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs36\cf6\lang3081 LESSON SEVENTEEN}{\b\fs32\lang3081 
\par The demonstratives: }{\b\i\fs32\lang3081 Sina}{\b\fs32\lang3081 , }{\b\i\fs32\lang3081 tan(y)a}{\b\fs32\lang3081 , }{\b\i\fs32\lang3081 enta}{\b\fs32\lang3081 , }{\b\i\fs32\lang3081 yana}{\b\fs32\lang3081 . Inflecting the "Last Declinable Word". }{
\b\i\fs32\lang3081 U}{\b\fs32\lang3081 -stem nouns. Ordinals in -}{\b\i\fs32\lang3081 \'eba}{\b\fs32\lang3081 .}{\lang3081 
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 QUENYA DEMONSTRATIVES}{\lang3081 
\par "Demonstratives" are such words as English }{\i\lang3081 this}{\lang3081  or }{\i\lang3081 that}{\lang3081 , with the corresponding plural forms }{\i\lang3081 these}{\lang3081  and }{\i\lang3081 those}{\lang3081 
. Thus, they have a stronger meaning than the mere article }{\i\lang3081 the}{\lang3081  (though in the languages of the
 world, many definitive articles descend from older demonstratives that were overused so that their meaning faded). The demonstratives may be used together with nouns, producing phrases like "this house" or "that man".
\par \tab In LotR-style Quenya we have only one demonstrative attested in an actual text: Cirion's Oath commences with the words }{\b\lang3081 vanda sina}{\lang3081 , translated "this oath". The Quenya word order is actually "oath this", }{\b\lang3081 sina}{
\lang3081  being the word for "this": The root }{\i\lang3081 SI}{\lang3081 - has to do with }{\i\lang3081 present}{\lang3081  position in time or space (cf. such words as }{\b\lang3081 s\'ed}{\lang3081  "now" or }{\b\lang3081 sinom\'eb}{\lang3081 
 "in this place" = "here", the latter from Elendil's Declaration in LotR).
\par \tab A word for "that" appears as }{\b\lang3081 tanya}{\lang3081  in an early "Qenya" text published in MC:215, which has }{\b\lang3081 tanya wende}{\lang3081  for "that maiden". Here, the word-or
der is "English-style" with the demonstrative first and the noun it qualifies following it \endash  the opposite of the word order seen in Cirion's Oath. Perhaps the word order is free, so that }{\b\lang3081 vanda sina}{\lang3081  could just as well be }{
\b\lang3081 sina vanda}{\lang3081  \endash  and conversely, }{\b\lang3081 tanya wende}{\lang3081  could also be }{\b\lang3081 wende tanya}{\lang3081 ? Be that as it may, we cannot be quite certain that the word }{\b\lang3081 tanya}{\lang3081 
 is still valid in LotR-style Quenya. The }{\i\lang3081 Etymologies}{\lang3081  lists }{\i\lang3081 TA}{\lang3081  as the Elvish "demonstrative stem 'that'," and the actual Quenya word for "that" is given as }{\b\lang3081 tana}{\lang3081 
. Since this form seems like a perfect counterpart to }{\b\lang3081 sina}{\lang3081  "this", we will here use }{\b\lang3081 tana}{\lang3081  rather than }{\b\lang3081 tanya}{\lang3081 
 as the word for "that" (though it is also possible that the "Qenya" form }{\b\lang3081 tanya}{\lang3081  survived into the later stages of Tolkien's conception). So given that }{\b\lang3081 vanda sina}{\lang3081 
 is "this oath", we must assume that "that oath" would be }{\b\lang3081 vanda tana}{\lang3081 . Maybe we should update the "Qenya" phrase }{\b\lang3081 tanya wende}{\lang3081  "that maiden" to LotR-style Quenya }{\b\lang3081 vend\'eb tana}{\lang3081  (or 
}{\b\lang3081 wend\'eb tana}{\lang3081  with the older form or archaic spelling of the word for "maiden"). Then we also implement the word-order seen in Cirion's Oath, with the demonstrative }{\i\lang3081 following}{\lang3081 
 rather than preceding the noun it connects with: In the entry }{\i\lang3081 TA}{\lang3081  in the Etym, Tolkien actually described }{\b\lang3081 tana}{\lang3081  an }{\i\lang3081 anaphoric}{\lang3081  word for "that", meaning that i
t refers back to something already mentioned.
\par \tab However, }{\b\lang3081 sina}{\lang3081  "this" and }{\b\lang3081 tan(y)a}{\lang3081 
 "that" are not the only Quenya demonstratives known. Though not actually observed in any Quenya texts, other demonstratives are mentioned in Tolkien's notes. Another word for "that" is }{\b\lang3081 enta}{\lang3081 , mentioned in the entry }{\i\lang3081 
EN}{\lang3081  in the }{\i\lang3081 Etymologies}{\lang3081  and there described as an adjective meaning "that yonder". The root }{\i\lang3081 EN}{\lang3081 
 itself is said to be an "element or prefix = over there, yonder". Still letting the demonstrative follow the noun it connects with, we may perhaps construct a phrase like }{\b\lang3081 coa enta}{\lang3081 
, expressing "that house" in the sense of "yonder house", "that house over there". 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 It may be that Tolkien meant Quenya to distinguish }{\i\lang3081 three}{\lang3081 
 degrees of nearness or remoteness, as do certain languages of our own world. English typically only distinguishes two degrees, "this" and "that": To simplify matters rather drastically, we ma
y say that "this" refers to something near the speaker, whereas "that" refers to something away from the speaker. But in some languages, the position of the }{\i\lang3081 listener}{\lang3081 
 is also considered. There are two words for "that", one referring to something away from the speaker but }{\i\lang3081 near}{\lang3081 
 the person addressed ("that thing over by you") and another word referring to something that is not close to either the speaker or the listener ("that thing we see over there"). Could it be that in Quenya, }{\b\lang3081 tana}{\lang3081 
 as a word for "that" refers to something close to the person addressed, whereas }{\b\lang3081 enta}{\lang3081  refers to something that is remote from }{\i\lang3081 both}{\lang3081 
 the speaker and the person (s)he addresses? There is presently little or no evidence to back up such a theory, but we can at least be certain that the word }{\b\lang3081 enta}{\lang3081 
 clearly connotes the idea of "over there", "that yonder", of something separated from the speaker by }{\i\lang3081 physical distance}{\lang3081 . It may be noted that one Sindarin word for "there", namely }{\i\lang3081 ennas}{\lang3081 
 (SD:129 cf. 128), is understood to represent an older locative form that could correspond to a Quenya word }{\b\lang3081 entass\'eb}{\lang3081  = "in yonder [place]". (Perhaps }{\b\lang3081 tana}{\lang3081 
 is simply a more general word for "that", merely focusing on the special identity of someone or something: "}{\i\lang3081 that}{\lang3081  one" as opposed to any other.)
\par Yet another word for "that" is }{\b\lang3081 yana}{\lang3081 , mentioned in the entry }{\i\lang3081 YA}{\lang3081  in Etym: After the gloss "that", Tolkien added a parenthetical specification: "(the former)". Perhaps }{\b\lang3081 aran yana}{\lang3081 
 would mean "that king" with the implication that we are talking about a former king, now dead or at least no longer ruling. There may be interesting contrasts between }{\b\lang3081 yana}{\lang3081  and }{\b\lang3081 enta}{\lang3081 
 as words for "that": In the }{\i\lang3081 Etymologies}{\lang3081 , Tolkien noted that the root }{\i\lang3081 YA}{\lang3081  signifies "there, over there; of time, ago". He added that }{\i\lang3081 EN}{\lang3081 , the root producing }{\b\lang3081 enta}{
\lang3081 , "of time points to the future". So "that day" may translate as }{\b\lang3081 aur\'eb enta}{\lang3081  if we are talking about some }{\i\lang3081 future}{\lang3081  day, not yet come, whereas }{\b\lang3081 aur\'eb yana}{\lang3081 
 is "that day" with reference to some day in the }{\i\lang3081 past}{\lang3081 . (A "neutral" wording, with no special implications, may be }{\b\lang3081 aur\'eb tana}{\lang3081 .)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
\par As for }{\i\lang3081 plural}{\lang3081  demonstratives, like English "these" and "those", we have no attested Quenya forms. Yet the words }{\b\lang3081 sina}{\lang3081  "this" and }{\b\lang3081 tana}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 yana}{\lang3081 
 "that" do look like adjectives by their form (-}{\b\lang3081 na}{\lang3081  being an adjectival or participial ending), and }{\b\lang3081 enta}{\lang3081  "that yonder" Tolkien explicitly identified as an adjective (Etym, entry }{\i\lang3081 EN}{
\lang3081 ). So in all likelihood, we can inflect all of these words as adjectives, and then we can derive their plural forms simply by changing the final -}{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081  to -}{\b\lang3081 \'eb}{\lang3081 :
\par 
\par \tab }{\b\lang3081 vanda sina}{\lang3081  "this oath" / }{\b\lang3081 vandar sin\'eb}{\lang3081  "these oaths"
\par \tab }{\b\lang3081 n\'eds tana}{\lang3081  "that woman" / }{\b\lang3081 nissi tan\'eb}{\lang3081  "those women"
\par \tab }{\b\lang3081 coa enta}{\lang3081  "that house [over there]" / }{\b\lang3081 coar ent\'eb}{\lang3081  "those houses"
\par \tab }{\b\lang3081 aur\'eb yana}{\lang3081  "that day [in the past]" / }{\b\lang3081 auri yan\'eb}{\lang3081  "those days"
\par  
\par As in the case of normal adjectives with the ending -}{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081 , the plural forms in -}{\b\lang3081 \'eb}{\lang3081  would represent archaic forms in -}{\b\lang3081 ai}{\lang3081  (}{\b\lang3081 vandar sinai}{\lang3081 
 etc.) Indirect evidence confirms that demonstratives could receive the plural ending -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081  in older Elvish: In LotR, in the inscription on the Moria Gate, occurs the Sindarin phrase }{\i\lang3081 i thiw }{\i\ul\lang3081 hin}{
\lang3081 , translated "}{\ul\lang3081 these}{\lang3081  runes". Tolkien would have meant this to represent something like }{\i\lang3081 in te\'f1w\'e2i }{\i\ul\lang3081 sin\'e2i}{\lang3081  at an older stage \endash 
 and in Quenya, an old plural demonstrative }{\i\lang3081 sin\'e2i}{\lang3081  "these" would first become }{\b\lang3081 sinai}{\lang3081  and then }{\b\lang3081 sin\'eb}{\lang3081 .
\par 
\par It is not clear whether the demonstratives discussed above could occur by themselves, independently, and not only in conjunction with nouns. Can we use }{\b\lang3081 sina}{\lang3081 
 for "this" in a sentence like "this is a good house"? (And if we needed a plural form "these", should we inflect }{\b\lang3081 sina}{\lang3081  as a }{\i\lang3081 noun}{\lang3081  when it occurs by itself, so that the plural would now be }{\b\lang3081 
sinar}{\lang3081  rather than }{\b\lang3081 sin\'eb}{\lang3081 ?) In PM:401, we have the sentence }{\b\ul\lang3081 sin }{\b\lang3081 quent\'eb Quendingoldo}{\lang3081 . Tolkien provided no translation, but it must mean either "}{\ul\lang3081 this}{
\lang3081  Quendingoldo said" or "}{\ul\lang3081 thus}{\lang3081  spoke Quendingoldo". The latter interpretation has it that }{\b\lang3081 sin}{\lang3081  is an adverb "thus", but if }{\b\lang3081 sin}{\lang3081 
 means "this", it would be what we may call a }{\i\lang3081 demonstrative pronoun}{\lang3081  \endash  corresponding to }{\b\lang3081 sina}{\lang3081 , the latter however being an adjective only occurring in conjunction with a noun. By this interpretati
on, it would be }{\b\lang3081 sin}{\lang3081 , rather than }{\b\lang3081 sina}{\lang3081 , we should use in sentences like "this is a good house" or "I have seen this". (And should the independent word for "these" be something like }{\b\lang3081 sini}{
\lang3081 , then?) As for the other demonstratives, we have }{\b\lang3081 ta}{\lang3081  as an "independent" form of "that", corresponding to the adjective }{\b\lang3081 tana}{\lang3081  (see Etym, entry }{\i\lang3081 TA}{\lang3081 
). Of other such "independent" forms, little or nothing is known, and in the exercises below, we will concentrate on the adjectival demonstratives }{\b\lang3081 sina}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 tana}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 enta}{\lang3081 , }{
\b\lang3081 yana}{\lang3081  used in conjunction with nouns.
\par }{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 INFLECTING THE "LAST DECLINABLE WORD"}{\cf2\lang3081 
\par }{\lang1033 Now that we have presented all the Quenya cases, we may also point out that the various case endings are not always attached to the noun they logically "belong" to. Where that noun is part of a longe
r phrase, like when the noun is followed by an attributive adjective describing it, the case ending may be added to the }{\i\lang1033 last}{\lang1033  word of the phrase.
\par \tab Cirion's Oath provides the classical example. It includes a reference to }{\b\lang1033 Elendil Voronda}{\lang1033 , "Elendil the Faithful", }{\b\lang1033 voronda}{\lang1033 
 being a Quenya adjective meaning "steadfast, faithful". Wrote Tolkien: "Adjectives used as a 'title' or frequently used attribute of a name are placed after the name." (UT:317; as we have pointed out earlier, Quenya here differs from English by }{
\i\lang1033 not}{\lang1033  inserting a definite article between the name and the adjective \endash  hence not }{\b\lang1033 Elendil i Voronda}{\lang1033 , at least not necessarily). 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 In Cirion's Oath, the name-and-title phrase }{\b\lang1033 Elendil Voronda}{\lang1033  is to appear in the genitive case: The Oath includes the words }{\b\lang1033 Elendil Vorond}{\b\ul\lang1033 o}
{\b\lang1033  voronw\'eb}{\lang1033 , "Elendil the Faithful}{\ul\lang1033 's}{\lang1033  faith" \endash  or (as it is translated in UT:305, with an English-style word order) "the faith }{\ul\lang1033 of}{\lang1033 
 Elendil the Faithful". Notice that the genitive ending -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033 , which we underlined, is added to the }{\i\lang1033 adjective}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 voronda}{\lang1033  (regularly displacing a final -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 
) rather than to the }{\i\lang1033 noun}{\lang1033  Elendil. In a way, the adjective following the noun is treated as an extension of the noun proper, and so the case ending is added at the end of the whole phrase. Tolkien commented on the construction }{
\b\lang1033 Elendil Vorondo}{\lang1033 : "As is usual in Quenya in the case of two declinable names in apposition only the last is declined" (UT:317). }{\b\lang1033 Voronda}{\lang1033 
 "faithful" here stands in apposition to "Elendil" as an additional "name" or title, and only the latter "name" is declined (inflected for case).
\par This principle would work with all the various cases. The allative of }{\b\lang1033 Elendil}{\lang1033  when the name occurs alone is attested as }{\b\lang1033 Elendilenna}{\lang1033 
 "to Elendil" (PM:401), but "to Elendil the Faithful" would apparently be }{\b\lang1033 Elendil Vorondanna}{\lang1033 , the last word of the phrase receiving the case ending.
\par Where a proper name followed by some epithet (like }{\b\lang1033 Voronda}{\lang1033  in this case) is concerned, the system of adding any case endings to the }{\i\lang1033 last}{\lang1033 
 word of the phrase may be more or less universal. Yet common nouns, not just proper names, may also be qualified by adjectives }{\i\lang1033 following}{\lang1033  rather than preceding the noun. Cf. for instance a phrase like }{\b\lang1033 mall\'eb t\'e9
ra}{\lang1033  "road straight" = "a straight road" (LR:47). If we were to add the locative ending to express "}{\i\lang1033 on}{\lang1033  a straight road", to what word should it be attached? Should we apply the "last declinable word" rule again (}{
\b\lang1033 mall\'eb t\'e9rass\'eb}{\lang1033 ) or attach the locative ending to the noun (}{\b\lang1033 malless\'eb t\'e9ra}{\lang1033 )?
\par It seems that both constructions would be permissible. The }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{\lang1033  poem provides a strin
g of examples of noun-phrases where the noun proper is followed by an adjective (in most cases a participle). Three consecutive examples involve the noun }{\b\lang1033 isilm\'eb}{\lang1033  "moonlight" combined with various participles (}{\b\lang1033 
ilcala}{\lang1033  "gleaming", }{\b\lang1033 p\'edcala}{\lang1033  "waning", }{\b\lang1033 lantala}{\lang1033  "falling"), and all three noun phrases are inflected for the locative case by attaching the locative ending to the }{\i\lang1033 last}{
\lang1033  word of the phrase:
\par 
\par }{\b\lang1033 isilm\'eb }{\b\cf6\lang1033 ilcala}{\b\cf2\lang1033 ss\'eb}{\lang1033  = "}{\cf2\lang1033 in}{\lang1033  }{\cf6\lang1033 gleaming}{\lang1033  moonlight"
\par }{\b\lang1033 isilm\'eb }{\b\cf6\lang1033 p\'edcala}{\b\cf2\lang1033 ss\'eb}{\lang1033  = "}{\cf2\lang1033 in}{\lang1033  }{\cf6\lang1033 waning}{\lang1033  moonlight"
\par }{\b\lang1033 isilm\'eb }{\b\cf6\lang1033 lantala}{\b\cf2\lang1033 ss\'eb}{\lang1033  = "}{\cf2\lang1033 in}{\lang1033  }{\cf6\lang1033 falling}{\lang1033  moonlight"
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par (Tolkien's more poetic translation in MC:215 goes "in the moon gleaming, in the moon waning, in the moon falling".)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Another phrase, again involving the participle }{\b\lang1033 ilcala}{\lang1033  "gleaming" but here combined with the allative case, is particularly interesting:
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\lang1033 axor }{\b\cf6\lang1033 ilcala}{\b\cf2\lang1033 nnar}{\lang1033  = "}{\cf2\lang1033 upon}{\lang1033  }{\cf6\lang1033 gleaming}{\lang1033  bones"
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Notice that the noun }{\b\lang1033 axo}{\lang1033  "bone" is here }{\i\lang1033 plural}{\lang1033 . The plural allative "upon bones" occurring by itself would of course be }{\b\lang1033 axonnar}{
\lang1033 . But here, where the plural allative ending -}{\b\lang1033 nnar}{\lang1033  is attached to the }{\i\lang1033 last}{\lang1033  word of the phrase instead, the noun }{\b\lang1033 axo}{\lang1033  itself receives only the simplest plural ending -}{
\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 . Normally, }{\b\lang1033 axor}{\lang1033  would be taken as a nominative plural, but actually the -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  merely marks the word as a plural form in the simplest possible way: The actual case mar
ker follows later in the phrase. Words with nominative plurals in -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  would of course receive this plural marker instead, e.g. }{\b\lang1033 vend}{\b\ul\lang1033 i}{\b\lang1033  }{\b\cf6\lang1033 lindala}{\b\cf2\lang1033 iva}{
\lang1033  = "}{\cf2\lang1033 of}{\lang1033  }{\cf6\lang1033 singing}{\lang1033  maiden}{\ul\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 " (home-made example involving the possessive case, but the principle would be the same for all the cases: dative }{\b\lang1033 
vendi lindalain}{\lang1033 , allative }{\b\lang1033 vendi lindalannar}{\lang1033 , etc.) We must assume that }{\i\lang1033 dual}{\lang1033 
 nouns would also appear in their simplest (normally "nominative") form at the beginning of the phrase: The noun would merely assume the dual ending -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , and the full dual }{\i\lang1033 case}{
\lang1033  ending would follow later in the phrase. To construct a Tolkienesque example: }{\b\lang1033 Aldu }{\b\cf6\lang1033 caltala}{\b\cf2\lang1033 nta}{\lang1033  = "}{\cf2\lang1033 upon}{\lang1033  [the] }{\cf6\lang1033 shining}{\lang1033 
 couple of trees".
\par \tab However, it is apparently not a hard-and-fast rule that you }{\i\lang1033 must}{\lang1033  attach a case ending to the last word of the entire phrase rather than to the noun proper. }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{\lang1033 
 contains examples of phrases where an attributive adjective follows the noun it describes, and yet the case ending is added to the noun, not the adjective. The first example involves a plural instrumental form (ending -}{\b\lang1033 inen}{\lang1033 
), whereas the second example involves the locative case (the ending -}{\b\lang1033 ss\'eb}{\lang1033  being added to a noun that is inflected for the somewhat obscure "partitive plural" marked by the ending -}{\b\lang1033 li}{\lang1033 ):
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 r\'e1ma}{\b\cf2\lang1033 inen}{\b\lang1033  }{\b\cf6\lang1033 elvi\'eb}{\lang1033  = "}{\cf2\lang1033 on}{\lang1033  [/}{\cf2\lang1033 with}{\lang1033 ] }{\cf6\lang1033 starlike}{\lang1033  wings"
\par }{\b\lang1033 ondoli}{\b\cf2\lang1033 ss\'eb}{\b\lang1033  }{\b\cf6\lang1033 morn\'eb}{\lang1033  = "}{\cf2\lang1033 on}{\lang1033  }{\cf6\lang1033 dark}{\lang1033  rocks"
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par Of course, the adjectives }{\b\lang1033 elv\'eba}{\lang1033  "starlike" and }{\b\lang1033 morna}{\lang1033  "dark" are here plural (}{\b\lang1033 elvi\'eb}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 morn\'eb}{\lang1033 
) to agree with the plural nouns they describe. It could be that in both instances, the case ending is not added to the adjective because the adjectival plural inflection and the case inflection would somehow collide. (In the phrase }{\b\lang1033 
axor ilcalannar}{\lang1033  "upon gleaming bones" there is no collision even though "bones" is plural, since participles in -}{\b\lang1033 la}{\lang1033  apparently do not agree in number.) It is less than clear how an ending like -}{\b\lang1033 inen}{
\lang1033  could be added to a form like }{\b\lang1033 elvi\'eb}{\lang1033  anyway: ?}{\b\lang1033 elvi\'ebinen}{\lang1033  seems like an unlikely and awkward form, prone to collapse into the quite obscure word **}{\b\lang1033 elv\'ednen}{\lang1033 
. Perhaps that is why Tolkien preferred to add the case ending to the noun }{\b\lang1033 r\'e1ma}{\lang1033  instead, even though this noun is not the last word of the phrase.
\par \tab Yet the system of inflecting the "last declinable word" does seem to be a common phenomenon in the language. It seems that sometimes, only the last item on a }{\i\lang1033 list}{\lang1033 
 receives case endings that actually apply to all the nouns that are listed. }{\b\lang1033 Namna Finw\'eb M\'edriello}{\lang1033  is translated "the Statute of Finw\'eb and M\'edriel" (MR:258). Not only is the conjunction }{\b\lang1033 ar}{\lang1033 
 "and" that would have separated the two names omitted, but the genitive ending -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033  "of" is added to the }{\i\lang1033 last}{\lang1033  name (}{\b\lang1033 M\'edriel}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 M\'edriell}{\lang1033 
-) only. The "full" construction would presumably have been }{\b\lang1033 Namna Finw\'ebo ar M\'edriello}{\lang1033 , but it was apparently permissible to strip the phrase down to basics to provide the "Statute" with a more concise title.
\par 
\par Though we have no attested examples, the }{\i\lang1033 demonstratives}{\lang1033  listed above would seem to be good candidates for receiving case endings, if the word order observed in the phrase }{\b\lang1033 vanda sina}{\lang1033 
 "oath this" is normal. For instance, if we were to add the instrumental ending to express "by this oath", it would perhaps be best to say }{\b\lang1033 vanda sinanen}{\lang1033 . However, }{\b\lang1033 vandanen sina}{\lang1033  would probably al
so be permissible \endash  and in the }{\i\lang1033 plural}{\lang1033  (nominative presumably }{\b\lang1033 vandar sin\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "these oaths"), consistently adding the case ending to the noun would be the safest course: "By these oaths" would then be }{\b\lang1033 vandainen sin\'eb}{\lang1033  rather than ?}{\b\lang1033 vandar sin\'ebinen}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 sin\'ednen}{
\lang1033  or whatever.
\par 
\par }{\b\i\cf2\lang3081 U}{\b\cf2\lang3081 -STEM NOUNS
\par }{\lang1033 Apparently in the latter part of the "Common Eldarin" stage of Tolkien's simulated evolution of his Elvish languages, two parallel changes occurred, affecting what had earlier been short final -}{\i\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  and short final -}{
\i\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 : they now turned into -}{\i\lang1033 e}{\lang1033  and -}{\i\lang1033 o}{\lang1033 , respectively. However, since this change only occurred where these vowels were }{\i\lang1033 final}{\lang1033 , they remained -}{\i\lang1033 i}{
\lang1033 - and -}{\i\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 - whenever some ending or other element followed. We have already alluded to this phenomenon earlier in this course; in particular, 
the student will remember it from the variation observed in the aorist of primary verbs: }{\b\lang1033 sil}{\b\ul\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  "shines", but pl. }{\b\lang1033 sil}{\b\ul\lang1033 i}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  "shine" (because original -}{
\i\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  did not change to -}{\i\lang1033 e}{\lang1033  when there was a following ending, like the plural marker -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  in this example). Similar v
ariation may be observed in nouns and adjectives: We have already mentioned the noun }{\b\lang1033 l\'f3m\'eb}{\lang1033  "night", which has the stem-form }{\b\lang1033 l\'f3mi}{\lang1033 - (SD:415) because it descends from earlier }{\i\lang1033 d\'f4mi}{
\lang1033 - (see the entry }{\i\lang1033 DOMO}{\lang1033  in Etym). We must assume that (say) the locative form "at night" would be }{\b\lang1033 l\'f3m}{\b\ul\lang1033 i}{\b\lang1033 ss\'eb}{\lang1033 . The adjective }{\b\lang1033 carn\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "red" descends from primitive }{\i\lang1033 karani}{\lang1033  (see Etym, entry }{\i\lang1033 KAR\'c1N}{\lang1033 ) and therefore has the stem-form }{\b\lang1033 carni}{\lang1033 -, for instance in a compound like }{\b\lang1033 Carn}{\b\ul\lang1033 i}{
\b\lang1033 stir}{\lang1033  "Red-face" (PM:353).
\par \tab The behaviour of these "}{\i\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 -stems" of course finds its parallel in the }{\i\lang1033 U-stems}{\lang1033 , words that end in -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033  when this vowel is absolutely final, but preserve an original -}{
\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  where some element follows this vowel. Such words seem to be predominantly (perhaps exclusively) }{\i\lang1033 nouns}{\lang1033 . One example of a U-stem noun is }{\b\lang1033 ango}{\lang1033  "snake": Its stem-form }{
\b\lang1033 angu}{\lang1033 - is directly observed in the compound }{\b\lang1033 ang}{\b\ul\lang1033 u}{\b\lang1033 l\'f3c\'eb}{\lang1033  (simply glossed "dragon", but actually combining the word for "snake" with the word normally translated "dragon", }{
\b\lang1033 l\'f3c\'eb}{\lang1033 : see the entry }{\i\lang1033 LOK}{\lang1033  in Etym). In the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 , Tolkien derived }{\b\lang1033 ango}{\lang1033  "snake" from older }{\i\lang1033 ANGU}{\lang1033  (or }{\i\lang1033 
ANGWA}{\lang1033 , which would become }{\i\lang1033 angw}{\lang1033  and then }{\i\lang1033 angu}{\lang1033 ), so the final -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033  of this word does indeed represent an older -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 . Whenever the noun }{
\b\lang1033 ango}{\lang1033  is to receive endings for case or pronoun, it would apparently assume the form }{\b\lang1033 angu}{\lang1033 -, e.g. dative }{\b\lang1033 angun}{\lang1033  "for a snake", ablative }{\b\lang1033 angullo}{\lang1033 
 "from a snake" or with a pronominal ending e.g. }{\b\lang1033 angulya}{\lang1033  "your snake". The genitive would presumably be }{\b\lang1033 anguo}{\lang1033  "of a snake". (As we have demonstrated earlier, "normal" nouns ending in -}{\b\lang1033 o}{
\lang1033  do not have distinct genitive singular forms; the genitive ending -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033  simply merges with the final vowel.)
\par \tab Where U-stem nouns end in either -}{\b\lang1033 go}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 co}{\lang1033 , they assume a peculiar form in the nominative plural. Normally, nouns ending in -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033 
 would of course have nominative plural forms in -}{\b\lang1033 or}{\lang1033 . However, where -}{\b\lang1033 go}{\lang1033  and -}{\b\lang1033 co}{\lang1033  represent older -}{\i\lang1033 gu}{\lang1033  and -}{\i\lang1033 ku}{\lang1033 
, it seems that adding the primitive plural ending -}{\i\lang1033 \'ee}{\lang1033  made the preceding }{\i\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  become }{\i\lang1033 w}{\lang1033 , so that the plurals came to end in -}{\i\lang1033 gw\'ee}{\lang1033  or -}{\i\lang1033 kw
\'ee}{\lang1033 . Probably }{\i\lang1033 w}{\lang1033  merged with the }{\i\lang1033 g}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 k}{\lang1033  preceding it: The combinations }{\i\lang1033 gw}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 kw}{\lang1033 
 are evidently best taken as unitary sounds, }{\i\lang1033 labialized}{\lang1033  versions of }{\i\lang1033 g}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 k}{\lang1033  (that is, }{\i\lang1033 g}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 k}{\lang1033  pronounced with poised lips 
\endash  look up Lesson One again). In Quenya, these labialized sounds persisted, though by convention, }{\i\lang1033 kw}{\lang1033  is spelt }{\b\lang1033 qu}{\lang1033 . Bottom line is, when we are told that }{\b\lang1033 ango}{\lang1033 
 "snake" has the stem }{\b\lang1033 angu}{\lang1033 -, we can also deduce that the plural form is neither **}{\b\lang1033 angor}{\lang1033  nor **}{\b\lang1033 angur}{\lang1033 , but }{\b\lang1033 angwi}{\lang1033 ! The }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{
\lang1033  confirms this; the plural form }{\b\lang1033 angwi}{\lang1033  is explicitly mentioned in the entry }{\i\lang1033 ANGWA}{\lang1033 /}{\i\lang1033 ANGU}{\lang1033 .
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 An example of a -}{\b\lang1033 qui}{\lang1033  plural is provided by the word }{\b\lang1033 urco}{\lang1033  "bogey", which has the plural }{\b\lang1033 urqui}{\lang1033  (= }{\i\lang1033 urcwi}{
\lang1033 ). Regarding this word, Tolkien noted that "as the plural form shows", }{\b\lang1033 urco}{\lang1033  must be derived from either }{\i\lang1033 urku}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 uruku}{\lang1033  in the primitive language (WJ:390). Thus, }{
\b\lang1033 urco}{\lang1033  is definitely a U-stem noun, its final -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033  representing older -}{\i\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 , and we would still see }{\b\lang1033 urcu}{\lang1033 - in compounds and before most inflectional endings.

\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab 
\par }{\fs20\lang1033 NOTE: The word }{\b\fs20\lang1033 urco}{\fs20\lang1033  "bogey" is akin to Sindarin }{\i\fs20\lang1033 orch}{\fs20\lang1033 , "Orc". In WJ:390, Tolkien notes that in the lore of the Blessed Realm, the word }{\b\fs20\lang1033 urco}{
\fs20\lang1033  "naturally seldom occurs, except in tales of the ancient days and the March [of the Eldar from Cuivi\'e9nen], and then [it] is vague in meaning, referring to anythin
g that caused fear to the Elves, any dubious shape or shadow, or prowling creature... It might indeed be translated 'bogey'." Later, when the Noldor returned to Middle-earth, the word }{\b\fs20\lang1033 urco}{\fs20\lang1033  pl. }{\b\fs20\lang1033 urqui}{
\fs20\lang1033  was primarily used with reference to Orcs, since the kinship ("though not precise equivalence") of this Quenya term to Sindarin }{\i\fs20\lang1033 orch}{\fs20\lang1033 
 was recognized. In Exilic Quenya, a Sindarin-influenced form also appeared: }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Orco}{\fs20\lang1033 , the plural of which could be either }{\b\fs20\lang1033 orcor}{\fs20\lang1033  or }{\b\fs20\lang1033 orqui}{\fs20\lang1033 
. The plural form }{\b\fs20\lang1033 orcor}{\fs20\lang1033  occurs elsewhere as well (MR:74), but if one prefers }{\b\fs20\lang1033 orqui}{\fs20\lang1033 , one should probably let }{\b\fs20\lang1033 orco}{\fs20\lang1033 
 "Orc" function as a U-stem in all respects. For instance, if one were to coin a compound "Orc-language", it should be }{\b\fs20\lang1033 orc}{\b\fs20\ul\lang1033 u}{\b\fs20\lang1033 lamb\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  rather than }{\b\fs20\lang1033 orc}{
\b\fs20\ul\lang1033 o}{\b\fs20\lang1033 lamb\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033 . In the }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Etymologies}{\fs20\lang1033 , far predating the source reproduced in WJ:390, Tolkien also gives the relevant word (glossed "goblin!") as }{\b\fs20\lang1033 orco}{
\fs20\lang1033  pl. }{\b\fs20\lang1033 orqui}{\fs20\lang1033 : stem }{\i\fs20\lang1033 \'d3ROK}{\fs20\lang1033 . In Etym, there is no hint that this word was borrowed into Quenya from another language; }{\b\fs20\lang1033 orco}{\fs20\lang1033 
 is referred to a primitive form }{\i\fs20\lang1033 \'f3rku}{\fs20\lang1033 . Tolkien's precise ideas about the history of the Quenya word for "Orc" were apparently subject to change, but the basic idea that nouns in -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 co}{
\fs20\lang1033  derived from primitive forms in -}{\i\fs20\lang1033 ku}{\fs20\lang1033  should have plurals in -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 qui}{\fs20\lang1033  rather than -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 cor}{\fs20\lang1033  is seen to persist. \endash 
 In accordance with our policy of avoiding specific references to Tolkien's mythos in the exercises, we will not refer to "Orcs" here, but we can use the word }{\b\fs20\lang1033 urco}{\fs20\lang1033 
 in its sense of "bogey" (it will occur in the exercises appended to Lesson Eighteen).
\par }{\lang1033 
\par }{\lang3081 We will try to survey the words involved (excluding the earliest "Qenya" material). }{\b\lang3081 Ango}{\lang3081  "snake", pl. }{\b\lang3081 angwi}{\lang3081 , seems to be our sole entirely certain example of a -}{\b\lang3081 gwi}{\lang3081 
 plural. In the }{\i\lang3081 Etymologies}{\lang3081 , there was also }{\b\lang3081 lango}{\lang3081  "throat", pl. }{\b\lang3081 langwi}{\lang3081  (see the entry }{\i\lang3081 LANK}{\lang3081 ). The form }{\b\lang3081 langwi}{\lang3081 
 is for some reason marked with an asterisk, which would normally indicate that this form is unattested, but possibly it has another meaning here. Anyway, Tolkien decided to change the word for "throat", turning it into }{\b\lang3081 lanco}{\lang3081 
 instead. It is entirely possible that this is also a U-stem, so that its plural should be }{\b\lang3081 lanqui}{\lang3081  rather than }{\b\lang3081 lancor}{\lang3081 , though we have no explicit information to this effect.
\par \tab One certain U-stem is the word for "arm", }{\b\lang3081 ranco}{\lang3081  (primitive form explicitly given as }{\i\lang3081 ranku}{\lang3081 ). Just as we would expect, the plural form is }{\b\lang3081 ranqui}{\lang3081 ; see the entry }{\i\lang3081 
RAK}{\lang3081  in Etym. A word meaning "arm" would presumably often appear in its }{\i\lang3081 dual}{\lang3081  form to signify a natural pair of arms. We may wonder whether the dual form of }{\b\lang3081 ranco}{\lang3081  would be }{\b\lang3081 rancu}{
\lang3081  (with the dual ending -}{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081 , quite unrelated to the original final -}{\i\lang3081 u}{\lang3081  that later became -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081 ) or }{\b\lang3081 rancut}{\lang3081  (i.e., the U-stem noun }{\b\lang3081 
ranco}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 rancu}{\lang3081 - with the dual ending -}{\b\lang3081 t}{\lang3081 ). As we have argued from the attested example }{\b\lang3081 peu}{\lang3081  "pair o
f lips", nouns denoting body-parts occurring in pairs may consistently have "fossilized" dual forms in -}{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081 
, since it was this ending that originally denoted a natural or logical pair. Once a pronominal ending is added, we may at least safely suffix -}{\b\lang3081 t}{\lang3081  to in
dicate a dual form. Indeed, without this ending there would be no distinction between }{\b\lang3081 ranculya}{\lang3081  "your arm" and }{\b\lang3081 ranculyat}{\lang3081  "your (pair of) arms", no matter what the dual of }{\b\lang3081 ranco}{\lang3081 
 may be when the word occurs by itself: Before endings, }{\b\lang3081 ranco}{\lang3081  must become }{\b\lang3081 rancu}{\lang3081 - anyway.
\par \tab Another U-stem is }{\b\lang3081 rusco}{\lang3081  "fox"; it our source, Tolkien mentioned both the stem-form }{\b\lang3081 ruscu}{\lang3081 - and the plural }{\b\lang3081 rusqui}{\lang3081  (VT41:10).
\par \tab Not all U-stems end in -}{\b\lang3081 co}{\lang3081  or -}{\b\lang3081 go}{\lang3081 , of course. One example is the word }{\b\lang3081 curo}{\lang3081  "a skillful device" (VT41:10, last word of gloss
 uncertain due to Tolkien's difficult handwriting). Tolkien cited the stem-form }{\b\lang3081 curu}{\lang3081 -, and it apparently also occurs in Saruman's Quenya name: }{\b\lang3081 Curumo}{\lang3081  (UT:401). This name seems to combine the element }{
\b\lang3081 curu}{\lang3081 - with the masculine ending -}{\b\lang3081 mo}{\lang3081  "that often appeared in names or titles" (WJ:400). We may wonder what the nominative plural of }{\b\lang3081 curo}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 curu}{\lang3081 
- would be. Could it be }{\b\lang3081 curwi}{\lang3081 , paralleling }{\b\lang3081 angwi}{\lang3081  as the plural of }{\b\lang3081 ango}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 angu}{\lang3081 - "snake"?
\par \tab Anyhow, the special nominative plurals ending in -}{\b\lang3081 wi}{\lang3081  (spelt -}{\b\lang3081 ui}{\lang3081  when part of -}{\b\lang3081 qui}{\lang3081 ) w
ould also be reflected in the genitive plural and the dative plural: If the nominative plural of }{\b\lang3081 rusco}{\lang3081  "fox" is }{\b\lang3081 rusqui}{\lang3081  (= }{\i\lang3081 ruscwi}{\lang3081 
) the corresponding dative and genitive forms can hardly be anything else than }{\b\lang3081 rusquin}{\lang3081  }{\i\lang3081 (= ruscwin)}{\lang3081  and }{\b\lang3081 rusquion}{\lang3081  }{\i\lang3081 (= ruscwion)}{\lang3081 , re
spectively. One would think that we would also see }{\b\lang3081 rusquiva}{\lang3081  }{\i\lang3081 (= ruscwiva)}{\lang3081  as the plural possessive, and }{\b\lang3081 rusquinen}{\lang3081  }{\i\lang3081 (= ruscwinen}{\lang3081 
) as the plural instrumental. There is one form that can be cited against the two latter assumptions: the related adjective }{\b\lang3081 ruscuit\'eb}{\lang3081  "foxy", mentioned in the same source that gives us }{\b\lang3081 rusco}{\lang3081 , }{
\b\lang3081 ruscu}{\lang3081 - pl. }{\b\lang3081 rusqui}{\lang3081  (VT41:10). In the word }{\b\lang3081 ruscuit\'eb}{\lang3081 , which includes the adjectival ending -}{\b\lang3081 it\'eb}{\lang3081 , there is }{\i\lang3081 no}{\lang3081  development }{
\b\lang3081 cui}{\lang3081  > }{\i\lang3081 cwi}{\lang3081  = }{\b\lang3081 qui}{\lang3081 ; we don't see **}{\b\lang3081 rusquit\'eb}{\lang3081 . The ending -}{\b\lang3081 it\'eb}{\lang3081  may by its shape resemble the case endings -}{\b\lang3081 iva}{
\lang3081  and }{\b\lang3081 -inen}{\lang3081  for plural possessive and plural instrumental. So if we have }{\b\lang3081 ruscuit\'eb}{\lang3081 , perhaps we would \endash  as phonologically parallel forms \endash  also see }{\b\lang3081 ruscuiva}{
\lang3081  and }{\b\lang3081 ruscuinen}{\lang3081  rather than }{\b\lang3081 rusquiva}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 rusquinen}{\lang3081 ? We cannot know. I will not construct any exercises involving the plural form of the possessive and instrumental cases.

\par \tab In the other cases, where the plural case endings do }{\i\lang3081 not}{\lang3081  include the vowel -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 , all one has to remember is to change the final -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  of a U-stem noun to -}{\b\lang3081 u}{
\lang3081  before adding whatever ending is relevant. Using }{\b\lang3081 ango}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 angu}{\lang3081 - "snake" as our example, we would for instance have the plural allative }{\b\lang3081 angunnar}{\lang3081  "to snakes" (not **}{
\b\lang3081 angwinna}{\lang3081  or **}{\b\lang3081 angwinnar}{\lang3081  or whatever; cf. the singular }{\b\lang3081 angunna}{\lang3081  "to a snake"). Likewise we would have the pl. ablative }{\b\lang3081 angullon}{\lang3081  or }{\b\lang3081 angullor}{
\lang3081  "from snakes" (sg. }{\b\lang3081 angullo}{\lang3081  "from a snake"), pl. locative }{\b\lang3081 angussen}{\lang3081  "in snakes" (sg. }{\b\lang3081 anguss\'eb}{\lang3081  "in a snake"). As the corresponding dual forms, we would presumably see 
}{\b\lang3081 angunta}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 angulto}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 anguts\'eb}{\lang3081  = "to/from/in a pair of snakes". Pronominal endings would also be added to the stem-form }{\b\lang3081 angu}{\lang3081 
-, and any further endings for number or case would then be added after the pronominal ending as described in earlier lessons: }{\b\lang3081 angulya}{\lang3081  "your snake", plural }{\b\lang3081 angulyar}{\lang3081  (hardly **}{\b\lang3081 angwilyar}{
\lang3081 !) "your snakes", dual }{\b\lang3081 angulyat}{\lang3081  "your pair of snakes", dative }{\b\lang3081 angulyan}{\lang3081  "for your snake", plural dative }{\b\lang3081 angulyain}{\lang3081  (hardly **}{\b\lang3081 angwilyain}{\lang3081 
!) "for your snakes", etc. etc.}{\i\lang3081 
\par }{\fs20\lang3081 NOTE: Nonetheless, the nominative plurals in -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 wi}{\fs20\lang3081  (-}{\b\fs20\lang3081 gwi}{\fs20\lang3081 , -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 qui}{\fs20\lang3081 ) must be seen as the most
 striking feature of U-stem nouns. In at least one instance, this plural formation apparently spread to another noun by analogy: According to the }{\i\fs20\lang3081 Etymologies}{\fs20\lang3081 , entry }{\i\fs20\lang3081 T\'c9LEK}{\fs20\lang3081 
, the noun }{\b\fs20\lang3081 telco}{\fs20\lang3081  "leg" has the plural }{\b\fs20\lang3081 telqui}{\fs20\lang3081 , but this plural is said to be "analogical". Presumably, Tolkien's idea is that }{\b\fs20\lang3081 telco}{\fs20\lang3081  is not a "true" 
}{\i\fs20\lang3081 u}{\fs20\lang3081 -stem noun (it does }{\i\fs20\lang3081 not}{\fs20\lang3081  come from Primitive Elvish }{\i\fs20\lang3081 teleku}{\fs20\lang3081  or }{\i\fs20\lang3081 telku}{\fs20\lang3081 , but rather descends from something like }{
\i\fs20\lang3081 telek\'f4}{\fs20\lang3081 , }{\i\fs20\lang3081 telk\'f4}{\fs20\lang3081 ). Therefore, its plural "should" have been }{\b\fs20\lang3081 telcor}{\fs20\lang3081 , and the actual form }{\b\fs20\lang3081 telqui}{\fs20\lang3081 
 is merely due to influence from such pairs as }{\b\fs20\lang3081 ranco}{\fs20\lang3081  pl. }{\b\fs20\lang3081 ranqui}{\fs20\lang3081  or }{\b\fs20\lang3081 urco}{\fs20\lang3081  pl. }{\b\fs20\lang3081 urqui}{\fs20\lang3081 . However, }{\b\fs20\lang3081 
telco}{\fs20\lang3081  seems to be exceptional in this respect. I don't think we should replace (say) }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Naucor}{\fs20\lang3081  as the plural form of }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Nauco}{\fs20\lang3081  "Dwarf" with **}{\b\fs20\lang3081 Nauqui}{
\fs20\lang3081 .
\par }{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 ORDINALS}{\cf2\lang3081 
\par }{\lang3081 We have already introduced three }{\i\lang3081 ordinal}{\lang3081  numbers, }{\b\lang3081 minya}{\lang3081  "first", (}{\b\lang3081 t}{\lang3081 )}{\b\lang3081 atya}{\lang3081  "second" and }{\b\lang3081 nelya}{\lang3081 
 "third". All three include the frequent adjectival ending -}{\b\lang3081 ya}{\lang3081  (occurring in the word }{\i\lang3081 Quenya}{\lang3081  "Elvish" itself). However, it turns out that most ordinals end in -}{\b\lang3081 \'eba}{\lang3081 
, displacing the final vowel of the corresponding }{\i\lang3081 cardinal}{\lang3081  number. Thus we have the following correspondences between cardinals and ordinals:
\par 
\par \tab }{\b\lang3081 canta}{\lang3081  "four" vs. }{\b\lang3081 cant\'eba}{\lang3081  "fourth"
\par \tab }{\b\lang3081 lemp\'eb}{\lang3081  "five" vs. }{\b\lang3081 lemp\'eba}{\lang3081  "fifth"
\par \tab }{\b\lang3081 enqu\'eb}{\lang3081  "six" vs. }{\b\lang3081 enqu\'eba}{\lang3081  "sixth"
\par \tab }{\b\lang3081 otso}{\lang3081  "seven" vs. }{\b\lang3081 ots\'eba}{\lang3081  "seventh"
\par \tab }{\b\lang3081 tolto}{\lang3081  "eight" vs. }{\b\lang3081 tolt\'eba}{\lang3081  "eighth" }{\fs20\lang3081 (also }{\b\fs20\lang3081 told\'eba}{\fs20\lang3081 , presupposing }{\b\fs20\lang3081 toldo}{\fs20\lang3081  as a variant word for "8")
\par }{\lang3081 \tab }{\b\lang3081 nert\'eb}{\lang3081  "nine" vs. }{\b\lang3081 nert\'eba}{\lang3081  "ninth"
\par 
\par This table is based on an account of Eldarin numerals written by Tolkien in the late sixties, published in VT42:24-27 (also see the editorial notes on pp. 30-31). Tolkien indicated that the word for "fifth" had earlier been either }{\b\lang3081 lemenya}{
\lang3081  or }{\b\lang3081 lepenya}{\lang3081  (with the same ending as in }{\b\lang3081 minya}{\lang3081  etc.), but this "irregular" form was later replaced by }{\b\lang3081 lemp\'eba}{\lang3081  by analogy with the simple cardinal }{\b\lang3081 lemp
\'eb}{\lang3081  "five". Tolkien's notes present varying views as to when this substitution occurred (whether already in pre-Exilic times, or later), but it is at least clear that in Frodo's day, }{\b\lang3081 lemp\'eba}{\lang3081 
 would be the word to use when you need to express "fifth".
\par \tab Even the words for "second" and "third" could have the ending -}{\b\lang3081 \'eba}{\lang3081  instead of -}{\b\lang3081 ya}{\lang3081 . The ordinal (}{\b\lang3081 t}{\lang3081 )}{\b\lang3081 atya}{\lang3081  "second" was "early replaced" by }{
\b\lang3081 att\'eba}{\lang3081 , which would be a "regular" formation compared to the cardinal }{\b\lang3081 atta}{\lang3081  "two". Similarly, }{\b\lang3081 nelya}{\lang3081  as the word for "three" could also be replaced by }{\b\lang3081 neld\'eba}{
\lang3081 , more clearly reflecting the cardinal }{\b\lang3081 neld\'eb}{\lang3081  "three" (but in this case, nothing is said about }{\b\lang3081 neld\'eba}{\lang3081  wholly }{\i\lang3081 replacing}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 nelya}{\lang3081 ).
\par \tab VT42:25 also lists a word for "tenth", }{\b\lang3081 quain\'eba}{\lang3081 , but this presupposes another word for "ten" than the form }{\b\lang3081 cainen}{\lang3081  mentioned in the }{\i\lang3081 Etymologies}{\lang3081 . A root }{\i\lang3081 KAY}{
\lang3081 - having to do with the number "ten" seems to have haunted Tolkien's imagination for at least thirty years, so I hesitate to throw it over board just because a divergent form turns up in one late manuscript \endash 
 but this is not the place to discuss what forms we should accept as "valid" or "canonical". The ordinal corresponding to the cardinal }{\b\lang3081 cainen}{\lang3081  could be either }{\b\lang3081 cainenya}{\lang3081  or }{\b\lang3081 cain\'eba}{
\lang3081  (but hardly ?}{\b\lang3081 cainen\'eba}{\lang3081 ).
\par \tab Over the next three lessons, we will work our way through the attested ordinals, starting with the word for "fourth" (}{\b\lang3081 cant\'eba}{\lang3081 ).}{\i\cf2\lang3081 
\par 
\par Summary of Lesson Seventeen:}{\lang3081  Quenya demonstratives include }{\b\lang3081 sina}{\lang3081  "this", }{\b\lang3081 tana}{\lang3081  "that" (one early source also has }{\b\lang3081 tanya}{\lang3081 ), }{\b\lang3081 enta}{\lang3081 
 "that (yonder)" (apparently with emphasis on spatial position, though it may also refer to something that lies in the }{\i\lang3081 future}{\lang3081 ) and }{\b\lang3081 yana}{\lang3081  "that (former)" (of time used of something that lies in the }{
\i\lang3081 past}{\lang3081 , the opposite of }{\b\lang3081 enta}{\lang3081 ). It may be assumed that the corresponding }{\i\lang3081 plural}{\lang3081  forms (the words for "these" and "those") end in -}{\b\lang3081 \'eb}{\lang3081  rather than -}{
\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081 , since these demonstratives probably behave like adjectives. Demonstratives are, or may be, placed }{\i\lang3081 after}{\lang3081  the noun they connect with; Cirion's Oath has }{\b\lang3081 vanda sina}{\lang3081 
 for "this oath" (we cannot know whether the English-style word order }{\b\lang3081 sina vanda}{\lang3081  would be equally valid, and the word order observed in Cirion's Oath is consistently employed in the exercises below). \endash  Where there are }{
\i\lang3081 several}{\lang3081  declinable words in a phrase, as when a noun is followed by an attributive adjective (or participle) describing it, a case ending may be added to the }{\i\lang3081 last}{\lang3081 
 word of the phrase. The noun itself, if not singular, would receive only the simplest endings for number (the endings normally associated with the nominative case, like -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081  or -}{\b\lang3081 r}{\lang3081 
 in the plural): The case ending that follows later in the phrase would still determine what case the entire phrase is. \endash  U-stem nouns originally ended in the vowel -}{\i\lang3081 u}{\lang3081 , which in Quenya has become -}{\b\lang3081 o}{
\lang3081  when the word occurs without endings, but where not final, the vowel remains -}{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081 -. Thus a word like }{\b\lang3081 ango}{\lang3081  "snake" appears as }{\b\lang3081 angu}{\lang3081 - in a compound (e.g. }{\b\lang3081 
angul\'f3c\'eb}{\lang3081  "snake-dragon"), and no doubt also before endings for pronoun or case (e.g. }{\b\lang3081 angulya}{\lang3081  "your snake", or allative }{\b\lang3081 angunna}{\lang3081  "to a snake"). The nominative }{\i\lang3081 plural}{
\lang3081  of U-stem nouns is formed with the ending -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081  (rather than -}{\b\lang3081 r}{\lang3081 ), and at least where the noun happens to end in -}{\b\lang3081 go}{\lang3081  or -}{\b\lang3081 co}{\lang3081 , 
the final vowel representing an older }{\i\lang3081 u}{\lang3081  turns into }{\b\lang3081 w}{\lang3081  before the plural ending. Thus the nominative plural of }{\b\lang3081 ango}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 angu}{\lang3081 - is }{\b\lang3081 angwi}{
\lang3081 , and the plural of }{\b\lang3081 ranco}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 rancu}{\lang3081 - is }{\b\lang3081 ranqui}{\lang3081  (this spelling representing }{\i\lang3081 rancwi}{\lang3081 ). These special plurals may also be reflected in
 the other cases that have plural case endings involving the vowel }{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 , certainly the genitive plural (}{\b\lang3081 angwion}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 ranquion}{\lang3081 ) and dative plural (}{\b\lang3081 angwin}{\lang3081 , }{
\b\lang3081 ranquin}{\lang3081 ). \endash  The }{\i\lang3081 ordinal}{\lang3081  numbers from "fourth" to "ninth" are formed by replacing the final vowel of the corresponding cardinal number with -}{\b\lang3081 \'eba}{\lang3081 , e.g. }{\b\lang3081 cant
\'eba}{\lang3081  "fourth" from }{\b\lang3081 canta}{\lang3081  "four". Even the ordinals (}{\b\lang3081 t}{\lang3081 )}{\b\lang3081 atya}{\lang3081  "second" and }{\b\lang3081 nelya}{\lang3081  "third" may be replaced by }{\b\lang3081 att\'eba}{
\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 neld\'eba}{\lang3081  (cf. the cardinals }{\b\lang3081 atta}{\lang3081  "two", }{\b\lang3081 neld\'eb}{\lang3081  "three").
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 VOCABULARY
\par }{\lang3081 In addition to learning these new words, the student should notice that the noun }{\b\lang3081 ranco}{\lang3081  "arm" (introduced in Lesson Three) is a U-stem: }{\b\lang3081 rancu}{\lang3081 -.
\par 
\par }{\b\lang3081 cant\'eba}{\lang3081  "fourth"
\par }{\b\lang3081 tana}{\lang3081  demonstrative "that"}{\fs20\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 enta}{\lang3081  demonstrative "that [yonder]", "[the one] over there" }{\fs20\lang3081 (of time referring to some future entity)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 yana}{\lang3081  demonstrative "that" = "the former" }{\fs20\lang3081 (of time referring to some past entity)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 sina}{\lang3081  demonstrative "this"
\par }{\b\lang3081 ango}{\lang3081  (}{\b\lang3081 angu}{\lang3081 -) "snake"
\par }{\b\lang3081 sangwa}{\lang3081  "poison"
\par }{\b\lang3081 l\'f3m\'eb}{\lang3081  (}{\b\lang3081 l\'f3mi}{\lang3081 -) "night"
\par }{\b\lang3081 polda}{\lang3081  adjective "strong, burly" }{\fs20\lang3081 (of physical strength only; the verb }{\b\fs20\lang3081 pol}{\fs20\lang3081 - "can" is probably related)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 halla}{\lang3081  adjective "tall"
\par }{\b forya}{\lang3081  adjective "right"
\par }{\b\lang3081 Formen}{\lang3081  "(the) North" }{\fs20\lang3081 (cf. }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Formenos}{\fs20\lang3081 , the "Northern Fortress" constructed by F\'ebanor in the Blessed Realm; the final element -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 os}{\fs20\lang3081 
 is reduced from }{\b\fs20\lang3081 osto}{\fs20\lang3081  "fortress; city".)}{\lang3081 
\par 
\par }{\fs20\lang3081 This concludes our listing of the four directions }{\b\fs20\lang3081 N\'famen}{\fs20\lang3081 , }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Hyarmen}{\fs20\lang3081 , }{\b\fs20\lang3081 R\'f3men}{\fs20\lang3081 , }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Formen}{\fs20\lang3081 
 = West, South, East, North (this being their proper "Middle-earth" order). Just as }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Hyarmen}{\fs20\lang3081  "South" is related to the adjective }{\b\fs20\lang3081 hyarya}{\fs20\lang3081  "left", so }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Formen}{
\fs20\lang3081  "North" is related to the adjective }{\b\fs20\lang3081 forya}{\fs20\lang3081  "right", since the reference-point is that of a person facing }{\i\fs20\lang3081 West}{\fs20\lang3081  (looking towards Valinor).
\par }{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 EXERCISES
\par }{\lang3081 
\par 1. Translate into English:
\par 
\par }{\i\lang3081 A}{\lang3081 . }{\b\lang3081 Engw\'eb sina n\'e1 i macil hirna Calandil Hallanen. }{\i\lang3081 
\par B.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Ily\'eb lamni av\'e1nier n\'f3r\'eb sinallo.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 C.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Ango harnan\'eb forya rancurya, ar eques: "Nai ily\'eb angwi firuvar!"}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 D.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 L\'f3m\'eb yanass\'eb hirnent\'eb Nauco tana ambo entass\'eb. }{\i\lang3081 
\par E.}{\b\lang3081  I hall\'eb ciryar oantier Formenna; ciryar tan\'eb \'favar tul\'eb i n\'f3rennar Hyarmeno.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 F.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 I cant\'eba auress\'eb t\'e1ri yana firn\'eb anguo sangwanen.
\par }{\i\lang3081 G.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 I pold\'eb ranqui i nerion Formello polir mapa i ehti ohtari mahtalallon.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 H.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Hr\'edv\'eb yanass\'eb marnent\'eb i cant\'eba coass\'eb mall\'eb tano.}{\lang3081 
\par 
\par 2. Translate into Quenya:
\par 
\par }{\i\lang3081 I.}{\lang3081  Watch that Dwarf, and don't watch this Elf!
\par }{\i\lang3081 J.}{\lang3081  A land without snakes is a good land, for many Men [}{\b\lang3081 Atani}{\lang3081 ] have died by }{\i\lang3081 (instrumental)}{\lang3081  snake-poison.
\par }{\i\lang3081 K.}{\lang3081  During }{\i\lang3081 (locative)}{\lang3081  the fourth night I saw a terrifying warrior on that road, and I raised my arms }{\i\lang3081 (dual)}{\lang3081 .}{\b\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 L.}{\lang3081  Wish that [= }{\b\lang3081 nai}{\lang3081 ] the strong son of Calandil the Tall will come to this land, for he will protect these cities in which we }{\i\lang3081 (inclusive)}{\lang3081  dwell!}{\fs20\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 M}{\lang3081 . That tower }{\i\lang3081 (or, yonder tower)}{\lang3081  is the fourth tower made by Elves in this land.
\par }{\i\lang3081 N}{\lang3081 . Those books are gone [}{\b\lang3081 vanw\'eb}{\lang3081  the pl. of }{\b\lang3081 vanwa}{\lang3081 ]; they have disappeared from your room.}{\i\lang3081 
\par O.}{\lang3081  On that day you shall see your son.
\par }{\i\lang3081 P}{\lang3081 . On that day they came from that [/yonder] mountain and went to this house.
\par 
\par }{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\fs36\cf6\lang3081 LESSON EIGHTEEN}{\b\fs32\lang3081 
\par Independent pronouns. Impersonal verbs. U-stem verbs. The various uses of }{\b\i\fs32\lang3081 l\'e1}{\b\fs32\lang3081 .}{\lang3081 
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 INDEPENDENT PRONOUNS
\par }{\b\fs20\cf2\lang3081 (inevitably entailing a discussion of certain Second Person obscurities) }{\lang1033 
\par All the pronouns so far discussed have been }{\i\lang1033 endings}{\lang1033 
. However, Quenya also has pronouns that appear as independent words. Some of them are emphatic; the pronoun appears as a separate word to put special emphasis on it. These emphatic pronouns we will discus
s in the next lesson. Here we will concentrate on the simplest independent pronominal elements.
\par \tab We have already cited Quenya sentences including the dative pronoun }{\b\lang1033 nin}{\lang1033  "for me". The dative ending -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  is here appended to an independent word for "I", }{\b\lang1033 ni}{\lang1033 , att
ested by itself in the "Arctic" sentence mentioned in }{\i\lang1033 The Father Christmas Letters}{\lang1033 
. (Though this posthumously published work of Tolkien's has nothing to do with the Arda mythos, the "Arctic" sentence is transparently a form of Quenya.) The relevant part of the sentence goes }{\b\lang1033 ni v\'e9la tye}{\lang1033 
, "I see you". The verb "see" is here apparently }{\b\lang1033 vel}{\lang1033 - rather than }{\b\lang1033 cen}{\lang1033 - (perhaps }{\b\lang1033 vel}{\lang1033 
- is "see" in the sense of "meet"?), but more remarkable is the fact that for the subject "I", the independent pronoun }{\b\lang1033 ni}{\lang1033  is used instead of the ending -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 ny\'eb}{\lang1033 
. There seems to be no obvious "reason" for this deviation from the normal system. It has been suggested that since the intended audience for }{\i\lang1033 The Father Christmas Letters}{\lang1033 
 was Tolkien's young children, he may have "simplified" the languag
e to make it easier for them to figure out which word means what. However, since the latter part of the "Arctic" sentence employs a quite complex grammatical construction which is certainly not the literal counterpart of the English translation provided, 
we should hardly think of the language as "simplified". For "I" as subject, the ending -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 (}{\b\lang1033 y\'eb}{\lang1033 ) added to the verb is normally to be preferred, but the independent word }{\b\lang1033 ni}{\lang1033 
 may be a valid alternative. It may be noted that in one of Tolkien's draft versions for Elendil's Declaration, the word that ended up as }{\b\lang1033 maruvan}{\lang1033  "I will remain/dwell" appears as }{\b\lang1033 nimaruva}{\lang1033 , Tolkien using 
}{\b\lang1033 ni}{\lang1033 - "I" as a prefix: SD:56. (It may be, however, that the idea of subject }{\i\lang1033 prefixes}{\lang1033  was dropped; no post-LotR evidence of such prefixes has ever been published. If I were to use the independent pronoun }{
\b\lang1033 ni}{\lang1033  instead of the ending -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 , I would let it stand as a separate word: }{\b\lang1033 Ni maruva}{\lang1033 .)
\par \tab Besides }{\b\lang1033 ni}{\lang1033 , we have a handful of other independent pronouns attested. One such pronoun is }{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033 , meaning "it" or "that" (see Etym, entry }{\i\lang1033 TA}{\lang1033  \endash  the demonstrative }{
\b\lang1033 tana}{\lang1033  "that" is of course related). One relatively early source suggests that it can receive case endings. The ten-word }{\i\lang1033 Koivien\'e9ni}{\lang1033  sentence published in }{\i\lang1033 Vinyar Tengwar}{\lang1033 
 #27 is not LotR-style Quenya in its entirety, but the short phrase }{\b\lang1033 Orome tanna lende}{\lang1033 
 (translated "Orome came thither") may well have remained a valid wording after "Qenya" evolved into Quenya as we know it from later sources. The word }{\b\lang1033 tanna}{\lang1033  "thither" seems to be }{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033 
 "that, it" with the regular allative ending -}{\b\lang1033 nna}{\lang1033  attached, hence "to that [place]" = "thither".
\par \tab In }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 , one independent pronoun occurs in the phrase }{\b\lang1033 imb\'eb met}{\lang1033  = "between us". This is a }{\i\lang1033 dual}{\lang1033  pronoun, referring to Galadriel and Varda, so }{\b\lang1033 met}{
\lang1033  appropriately receives the dual ending -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  (also known from nouns) to indicate that two persons are concerned. Removing the dual ending leaves us with }{\b\lang1033 me}{\lang1033 
, probably covering both "we" (subject form) and "us" (object form). In our example, this is an }{\i\lang1033 exclusive}{\lang1033  "we/us", corresponding to the ending -}{\b\lang1033 mm\'eb}{\lang1033 
, which is obviously closely related. The party addressed is not included (Galadriel was singing }{\i\lang1033 to}{\lang1033  Frodo }{\i\lang1033 about}{\lang1033  herself and Varda). }{\b\lang1033 Me}{\lang1033  is also attested in its }{\i\lang1033 
dative}{\lang1033  form, with the dative ending -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  attached: }{\b\lang1033 men}{\lang1033  = "for us, to us".
\par \tab The ending -}{\b\lang1033 ly\'eb}{\lang1033  "you" corresponds to an independent pronoun }{\b\lang1033 le}{\lang1033 
, which was apparently present already in early forms of Elvish (WJ:363). In Sindarin it had been lost, but it is precisely this circumstance which allows us to say with certainty that it survived in Quenya: In his notes on the Sindarin hymn }{
\i\lang1033 A Elbereth Gilthoniel}{\lang1033 , Tolkien stated that the reverential 2nd person pronoun }{\b\lang1033 le}{\lang1033  occurring in this Grey-elven text had been }{\i\lang1033 borrowed}{\lang1033  from Quenya (RGEO:73).
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 At Cormallen, the crowds hailed Frodo and Sam with the words }{\b\lang1033 a laita te, laita te}{\lang1033 , translated in Letters:308 as "bless them, bless them". Thus we have }{\b\lang1033 te}{
\lang1033  as an independent }{\i\lang1033 object}{\lang1033  pronoun "them". (For this meaning, the Cormallen Praise also provides us with the already-discussed }{\i\lang1033 ending}{\lang1033  -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , as in }{\b\lang1033 laituvalme
}{\b\ul\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  = "we shall bless }{\ul\lang1033 them}{\lang1033 ". Presumably the pronoun }{\b\lang1033 te}{\lang1033  and the ending -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  are related.) Whether this }{\b\lang1033 te}{\lang1033 
 can also be used as a subject form ("they") is unfortunately unclear. 
\par This }{\b\lang1033 te}{\lang1033  is possibly related to the word }{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033  "that, it" discussed above: It may well be that }{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033  early received the plural ending -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 , the resulting form }
{\b\lang1033 tai}{\lang1033  being as it were the plural form of "that" \endash  hence meaning something like "those [ones]" or indeed "them". By this theory, the attested form }{\b\lang1033 te}{\lang1033  is simply the unstressed variant of }{
\b\lang1033 tai}{\lang1033  (cf. adjectives in -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  having plural forms in -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033 , simplified from older -}{\b\lang1033 ai}{\lang1033 ). A direct attestation of a form }{\b\lang1033 tai}{\lang1033 
 eventually turned up in VT42:34, and the context allows the interpretation that it may literally mean "those"; see below. Interestingly, the dative form "for them, to them" is apparently attested as }{\b\lang1033 tien}{\lang1033 
. This could very well represent older }{\i\lang1033 taien}{\lang1033 , which would be }{\b\lang1033 tai}{\lang1033  "those" + the connecting vowel -}{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033 - + the dative ending -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 
. In this position, the diphthong }{\i\lang1033 ai}{\lang1033  is reduced to }{\i\lang1033 e}{\lang1033 , and as }{\i\lang1033 taien}{\lang1033  consequently morphs into }{\i\lang1033 te'en}{\lang1033  = }{\i\lang1033 t\'eben}{\lang1033 
, this rather unstable form becomes }{\b\lang1033 tien}{\lang1033  by exactly the same mechanism that also turns (}{\i\lang1033 laureai}{\lang1033  >) }{\i\lang1033 laur\'ebe}{\lang1033  into }{\b\lang1033 lauri\'eb}{\lang1033 
 (the plural form of the adjective }{\b\lang1033 laur\'eba}{\lang1033  "golden"). We may assume that the allative "to(wards) them" would likewise be }{\b\lang1033 tienna}{\lang1033 , whereas the ablative "from them" would be }{\b\lang1033 tiello}{
\lang1033 . These forms would coincide with the corresponding case forms of the noun }{\b\lang1033 ti\'eb}{\lang1033  "path", but in context, one should normally be able to figure out what the intended meaning is.
\par Another attested object pronoun is }{\b\lang1033 tye}{\lang1033 , translated "thee" or "you". We have already quoted the phrase }{\b\lang1033 ni v\'e9la tye}{\lang1033 
 "I see you" from the "Arctic" sentence. Other attestations come from a source that is more definitely Quenya or at least "Qenya": In LR:61, Herendil addresses his father Elendil with the words }{\b\lang1033 atarinya }{\b\ul\lang1033 tye}{\b\lang1033 -mel
\'e1n\'eb}{\lang1033 , "my father, I love }{\ul\lang1033 thee}{\lang1033 ", and Elendil answers, }{\b\lang1033 a yonya iny\'eb }{\b\ul\lang1033 tye}{\b\lang1033 -m\'e9la}{\lang1033 , "and I too, my son, I love }{\ul\lang1033 thee}{\lang1033 
". There are a few strange things here (like -}{\b\lang1033 n\'eb}{\lang1033  rather than -}{\b\lang1033 ny\'eb}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  being used as the pronominal ending "I" in the first sentence), but it is at least clear that }{
\b\lang1033 tye}{\lang1033  is the object pronoun "thee", and this is probably a valid form in LotR-style Quenya as well.
\par At this point it should be noted that Quenya has (at least) }{\i\lang1033 two}{\lang1033  sets of pronouns in the second person. The object pronoun }{\b\lang1033 tye}{\lang1033  is not "compatible" with the ending -}{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 (}{
\b\lang1033 y\'eb}{\lang1033 ) or the corresponding independent pronoun }{\b\lang1033 le}{\lang1033 , though all of these may be translated "you" in English. We must distinguish between the "L" forms, represented by the ending -}{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 
(}{\b\lang1033 y\'eb}{\lang1033 ) and the independent pronoun }{\b\lang1033 le}{\lang1033 , and the "T" forms, represented by the object pronoun }{\b\lang1033 tye}{\lang1033  and also by the verb ending -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 
 exemplified in WJ:364 (more about the latter in the next lesson; it is not to be confused with -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  = "them" as in }{\b\lang1033 laituvalme}{\b\ul\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  = "we will bless }{\ul\lang1033 them}{\lang1033 
"). All of these pronouns and endings have to do with the idea of "you, thou, thee", but Tolkien seems to have been changing his mind back and forth as to what the basic distinction between the T-forms and t
he L-forms really consists of. Back in Lesson Eight, we quoted a passage that was originally meant to go into the LotR appendices, but which was not in the event included there: Tolkien stated that "all these languages...had, or originally had, no distinc
tion between the singular and plural of the second person pronouns; but they had a marked distinction between the }{\i\lang1033 familiar}{\lang1033  forms and the }{\i\lang1033 courteous}{\lang1033 " (PM:42-43).
\par Within this scheme, the "L" forms would represent a polite and courteous "you", whereas the "T" forms signal a familiar/intimate "you" used to address close friends and family members. This would agree well with the evidence: In }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri
\'eb}{\lang1033 , Galadriel naturally uses "L" forms when politely addressing a relative stranger like Frodo, and in Sindarin, the Quenya borrowing }{\b\lang1033 le}{\lang1033  is used as a reverential singular "thee" (as in the hymn }{\i\lang1033 
A Elbereth Gilthoniel}{\lang1033 , where Varda is the party addressed). On the other hand, Herendil would obviously use a "T" form (}{\b\lang1033 tye}{\lang1033 ) when addressing his own father. When Tolkien translated }{\b\lang1033 tye}{\lang1033 
 in the latter example as "thee" rather than "you", he probably meant it to be an intimate rather than an overly solemn form (though confusingly, he might also use "thou/thee" to represent a formal or polite "you"; indeed this is how he rendered the "L"
 forms of both }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 A Elbereth Gilthoniel}{\lang1033 ).
\par What does not agree so well with this reconstruction is the fact that in WJ:364, Tolkien seems to imply that the "L" forms represent a }{\i\lang1033 plural}{\lang1033  "you", whereas the "T" forms stand for a }{\i\lang1033 singular}{\lang1033  "you" 
\endash  sharply contrasting with his earlier statement to the effect that Elvish (just like English) fails to distinguish between sg. and pl. "you". Moreover, "L" forms are unquestionably used in a singular sense in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{
\lang1033 , since Tolkien translated them using the distinctly }{\i\lang1033 singular}{\lang1033 
 English pronoun "thou". I think the only solution that comes close to incorporating all the material would be to assume that the "T" forms properly denote singular "you" whereas the "L" forms properly denote plural "you" \endash  but the latter fo
rms are also used as a }{\i\lang1033 polite singular}{\lang1033  "you" (so in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 ). Bottom line is, one should }{\i\lang1033 not}{\lang1033  use the object form }{\b\lang1033 tye}{\lang1033 
 for "you, thee" if one otherwise uses "L" forms like the ending -}{\b\lang1033 ly\'eb}{\lang1033  or the pronoun }{\b\lang1033 le}{\lang1033 : We are apparently dealing with two different kinds 
of "you" here, and the "T" forms are hardly interchangeable with the "L" forms.
\par Based on the object pronoun }{\b\lang1033 tye}{\lang1033  "you = thee" (}{\i\lang1033 not}{\lang1033  subject "thou"), some writers have ventured to extrapolate a First Person object form }{\b\lang1033 nye}{\lang1033  "me" (cf. }{\b\lang1033 ni}{
\lang1033  "I"). Apparently the form }{\b\lang1033 nye}{\lang1033  actually appears in Tolkien's papers, so we will adopt this }{\b\lang1033 nye}{\lang1033 
 = "me" here. It should be noted, however, that any case endings are added to the simplest form of the pronoun, that is, what functions as the }{\i\lang1033 subject}{\lang1033  form when it occurs by itself \endash  in this case }{\b\lang1033 ni}{
\lang1033  "I". Case endings are not added the }{\i\lang1033 object}{\lang1033  form }{\b\lang1033 nye}{\lang1033  "me": The dative form "to me" is not **}{\b\lang1033 nyen}{\lang1033 , despite the English translation. As we know, the actual form is }{
\b\lang1033 nin}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 ni-}{\b\ul\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  = "I-}{\ul\lang1033 for}{\lang1033 "). "For you/for thee" should likewise }{\i\lang1033 not}{\lang1033  be **}{\b\lang1033 tyen}{\lang1033 , for then w
e would be adding case endings to the object form again. Unfortunately, it is not clear what the subject form corresponding to }{\b\lang1033 tye}{\lang1033 
 "thee" really is, so the long-suffering student must forgive yet another batch of Second Person Obscurities: Mechanical extrapolation based on the attested }{\b\lang1033 ni}{\lang1033 /}{\b\lang1033 nye}{\lang1033  pair would of course land us on ?}{
\b\lang1033 ti}{\lang1033  as the subject form "thou". However, the story is almost certainly more complicated than this. The }{\i\lang1033 Sindarin}{\lang1033  pronominal ending for "you" is said to be -}{\i\lang1033 g}{\lang1033  or -}{\i\lang1033 ch}{
\lang1033 , indicating that these endings appeared as -}{\i\lang1033 k}{\lang1033 -, -}{\i\lang1033 kk}{\lang1033 - in earlier Elvish. In Quenya, a final -}{\i\lang1033 k}{\lang1033  would turn into -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  (cf. for instance }{
\b\lang1033 filic}{\lang1033 - as the stem-form of a noun meaning "small bird", closely reflecting the root }{\i\lang1033 PHILIK}{\lang1033 ; but when this noun appears without any endings, its Quenya form turns into }{\b\lang1033 fili}{\b\ul\lang1033 t}{
\lang1033 ). If the above-mentioned ending -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  "thou" likewise comes from an original -}{\i\lang1033 k}{\lang1033 , we must also assume that the object pronoun }{\b\lang1033 tye}{\lang1033  represents earlier }{\i\lang1033 kye}{
\lang1033  (initial }{\i\lang1033 ky}{\lang1033 - regularly turns into }{\b\lang1033 ty}{\lang1033 - in Quenya, cf. for instance the entry }{\i\lang1033 KYEL}{\lang1033  in Etym, from which root Tolkien derived the verb }{\b\lang1033 tyel}{\lang1033 
- "end, cease"). It is, then, this }{\i\lang1033 kye}{\lang1033  we must start from when trying to extrapolate the corresponding subject form. Its Quenya form would likely be }{\b\lang1033 ci}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 ki}{\lang1033 ) or perhaps rather }{
\b\lang1033 ce}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 ke}{\lang1033 ): In the pronouns, the vowel }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  may seem to be peculiar to the 1st person (}{\b\lang1033 ni}{\lang1033  "I"), whereas }{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033  is more frequent (}{
\b\lang1033 le}{\lang1033  "you", }{\b\lang1033 me}{\lang1033  "we" etc.) Thus, the dative form "for you, for thee" may be something like ?}{\b\lang1033 cen}{\lang1033 , and likewise in the other cases, e.g. ablative }{\b\lang1033 cello}{\lang1033 
 "from thee". If this is correct, what we have called the "T" forms must rather be termed the "C/T" forms, since the original }{\i\lang1033 k}{\lang1033  may be preserved in some Quenya forms as well (spelt }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033 
). But of course, we have now crossed over into the realm of Speculative Extrapolation. In the exercises below, only the attested object form }{\b\lang1033 tye}{\lang1033  appears.
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 To summarize, we have }{\b\lang1033 ni}{\lang1033  "I" (object form }{\b\lang1033 nye}{\lang1033  "me"), }{\b\lang1033 le}{\lang1033  "you" (plural or polite singular; the object form is likely also }{
\b\lang1033 le}{\lang1033 ), }{\b\lang1033 tye}{\lang1033  object form "thee, you" (intimate; the subject form that could also receive case endings is unfortunately uncertain, perhaps ?}{\b\lang1033 ce}{\lang1033  or ?}{\b\lang1033 ci}{\lang1033 ), }{
\b\lang1033 me}{\lang1033  "we" (exclusive; probably this can also be used as the object form "us"), }{\b\lang1033 te}{\lang1033  object form "them" (the subject form "they" is uncertain, but perhaps identica
l; in any case, it may be that this pronoun appears as }{\b\lang1033 tai}{\lang1033  when stressed, and before at least some case endings it assumes the form }{\b\lang1033 tie}{\lang1033 
-). This does not add up to a complete pronoun table; I hope to discuss what little can be inferred about the gaps in an appendix to this course.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 As for the }{\i\lang1033 functions}{\lang1033 
 of these pronouns, the examples cited above will already have provided the student with vital clues. These words (except the distinct object forms) can receive case endings; the dative form }{\b\lang1033 nin}{\lang1033 
 "for me, to me" is particularly well attested. Presumably we can also have allative }{\b\lang1033 ninna}{\lang1033  "to(wards) me", allative }{\b\lang1033 nillo}{\lang1033  "from me", locative }{\b\lang1033 niss\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "in me" and perhaps even instrumental }{\b\lang1033 ninen}{\lang1033  "by me". It should be noted that pronouns normally receive "singular" case endings, even if the pronoun is "plural" by its meaning; thus }{\b\lang1033 me}{\lang1033 
 "we" takes the singular dative ending -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 , not plural -}{\b\lang1033 in}{\lang1033  even though the word }{\b\lang1033 me}{\lang1033  is "plural" insofar as "we" must refer to several people. The }{\i\lang1033 dual}{\lang1033 
 ending -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  can however be added to independent pronouns, as indicated by the example }{\b\lang1033 me}{\b\ul\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  "[the two of] us" in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 
. Then any case endings would presumably also be dual: dative }{\b\lang1033 ment}{\lang1033 , allative }{\b\lang1033 menta}{\lang1033 , ablative }{\b\lang1033 melto}{\lang1033 , instrumental }{\b\lang1033 menten}{\lang1033 
. (Another plausible dual form could be ?}{\b\lang1033 let}{\lang1033  = "you two".)
\par Another function of the independent pronouns would be to appear following prepositions, as in the example }{\b\lang1033 imb\'eb met}{\lang1033  "between us [two]" in }{\i\lang1033 Namari\'eb}{\lang1033 
. In English, prepositions are followed by the object form (accusative case), hence for instance "as me" rather than "as I". If this applies to Quenya as well, the equivalent would be }{\b\lang1033 ve nye}{\lang1033 
, but we cannot be certain; perhaps the Eldar would actually say }{\b\lang1033 ve ni}{\lang1033  = "as I". The attested example }{\b\lang1033 imb\'eb met}{\lang1033  "between us [two]" is of no help in this matter, since }{\b\lang1033 me}{\lang1033  (wi
th or without the dual ending -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 ) likely covers both the subject form "we" and the object form "us". At least we can't go wrong as long as we are dealing with }{\b\lang1033 me}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 le}{\lang1033  (and }{
\b\lang1033 te}{\lang1033 ?), since these pronouns don't seem to have distinct subject/object forms.
\par The function of the }{\i\lang1033 object}{\lang1033  forms (the attested words }{\b\lang1033 nye}{\lang1033  "me", }{\b\lang1033 tye}{\lang1033  "you/thee", }{\b\lang1033 te}{\lang1033  "them" + the probable non-distinct forms }{\b\lang1033 me}{\lang1033 
 "us" and }{\b\lang1033 le}{\lang1033  "you" just discussed) would obviously be to appear as the object of a sentence. After all, pronominal objects can't always be expressed as one of the two attested object endings -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 
 "them" or -}{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  "it" (though the full list of object endings is likely somewhat longer). These object endings may be added to extended infinitives in -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 carita}{\b\ul\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 
 "to do it") or to verbs that also has a subject ending (}{\b\lang1033 ut\'favienye}{\b\ul\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  "I have found }{\ul\lang1033 it}{\lang1033 
"), but this grammatical environment is not always present. The independent object pronouns may for instance be used in imperative phrases, as in the attested example }{\b\lang1033 a laita }{\b\ul\lang1033 te}{\lang1033  "bless }{\ul\lang1033 them}{
\lang1033 " already cited. Presumably such pronouns can also be used following gerunds inflected for dative (e.g. }{\b\lang1033 ut\'falien cenien }{\b\ul\lang1033 tye}{\lang1033  "I have come [in order] to see }{\ul\lang1033 you}{\lang1033 
"). We may also have to use independent object pronouns where the verb has no }{\i\lang1033 subject}{\lang1033  pronominal ending to which an }{\i\lang1033 object}{\lang1033  pronominal ending can be added \endash 
 because the subject is expressed as a separate word. So while "we will bless them" can be packed into one word as }{\b\lang1033 laituvalmet}{\lang1033 , a sentence like "the people will bless them" must perhaps be }{\b\lang1033 i li\'eb laituva te}{
\lang1033  with a separate word for "them". (We can't know whether it is permissible to say ?}{\b\lang1033 i li\'eb laituvat}{\lang1033  with the ending -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 
 added to the verb even though it has no subject ending; using a separate word for "them" is therefore safer as well as clearer.)
\par The preferred word order is somewhat uncertain. Quenya may seem to prefer placing independent pronouns in }{\i\lang1033 front}{\lang1033  of the verb. Sometimes Tolkien even prefixed the object pronoun to the verb by means of a hyphen, as in the example }
{\b\ul\lang1033 tye}{\b\lang1033 -mel\'e1n\'eb}{\lang1033  "I love }{\ul\lang1033 thee}{\lang1033 " cited above. (Compare French }{\i\lang1033 je }{\i\ul\lang1033 t}{\i\lang1033 'aime}{\lang1033 , literally "I }{\ul\lang1033 you}{\lang1033 
 love" with the object preceding the verb instead of following it \endash  though French, as well as Quenya, normally has the object following the verb.) So perhaps sentences like "I have come to see }{\ul\lang1033 thee}{\lang1033 
" or "the people will bless }{\ul\lang1033 them}{\lang1033 " should rather be }{\b\lang1033 ut\'falien }{\b\ul\lang1033 tye}{\b\lang1033 -cenien}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 i li\'eb }{\b\ul\lang1033 te}{\b\lang1033 -laituva}{\lang1033 
, respectively? Sometimes, Tolkien even placed }{\i\lang1033 dative}{\lang1033  pronouns in front of the verb, as in the question occurring in the middle of }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 : }{\b\lang1033 S\'ed man i yulma }{\b\ul\lang1033 nin}{
\b\lang1033  enquantuva?}{\lang1033  = "Now who will refill the cup }{\ul\lang1033 for me}{\lang1033 ?" (notice how the Quenya word-order differs from that of the English translation). We even have one extreme example, involving the verb }{\b\lang1033 
lumna}{\lang1033 - "lie heavy", where a dative pronoun is not only prefixed to the verb but the dative ending -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  is }{\i\lang1033 assimilated}{\lang1033  to the initial }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 - of the verb itself: }{
\b\lang1033 Mel-lumna}{\lang1033  is translated "us-is-heavy" (LR:47), sc. "is heavy for us"; this must be the dative form }{\b\lang1033 men}{\lang1033  "for us, to us" + the aorist form }{\b\lang1033 lumna}{\lang1033 
 "lies heavy". The underlying, unattested form }{\b\lang1033 men-lumna}{\lang1033  apparently had to be altered because }{\b\lang1033 men}{\lang1033  completely glued itself to the following word and came to be perceived as }{\i\lang1033 part}{\lang1033 
 of it \endash  and then there was suddenly a de facto cluster }{\b\lang1033 nl}{\lang1033  which Quenya phonology did not permit, so it had to become }{\b\lang1033 l-l}{\lang1033  instead. Yet such extra
 complications are apparently avoidable, for other examples indicate that independent pronouns may also }{\i\lang1033 follow}{\lang1033  the verb. In VT41:13 we have the sentence }{\b\lang1033 \'f3renya qu\'e9ta }{\b\ul\lang1033 nin}{\lang1033 
 = "my heart is saying }{\ul\lang1033 to me}{\lang1033 " (variant }{\b\lang1033 \'f3renya quet\'eb }{\b\ul\lang1033 nin}{\lang1033 , page 11). Presumably }{\b\lang1033 \'f3renya nin qu\'e9ta}{\lang1033  (or even ...}{\b\lang1033 nin-qu\'e9ta}{\lang1033 
) would have been equally possible, but it is apparently not "necessary" to employ such a word order, or indeed to prefix object/dative pronouns directly to the verb.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par As for the "subject forms" discussed above, they may of course appear as the subject of a sentence, like }{\b\lang1033 ni}{\lang1033  "I" in }{\b\ul\lang1033 ni}{\b\lang1033  v\'e9la tye}{\lang1033  "}{\ul\lang1033 I}{\lang1033 
 see you". Nonetheless, here Quenya would more frequently use pronominal endings (like }{\b\lang1033 v\'e9lan}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 v\'e9lany\'eb}{\lang1033  in this case \endash  assuming that the verb ?}{\b\lang1033 vel}{\lang1033 
- "see" is valid in LotR-style Quenya!) For poets trying to maintain some meter it may be useful to be able to choose between independent pronouns and pronominal endings. However, the "subject forms" discussed above would most often be encountered, not as
 grammatical subjects, but with case endings attached! Even so, it is probable that pronouns like }{\b\lang1033 ni}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 le}{\lang1033 
 would frequently function as the subject of sentences when the copula "is/are/am" is left out and understood: }{\b\lang1033 Ni aran }{\lang1033 "I [am] king", }{\b\lang1033 le halla}{\lang1033  "you [are] tall", etc.
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 IMPERSONAL VERBS}{\lang1033 
\par Having investigated independent dative forms like }{\b\lang1033 nin}{\lang1033  "for me, to me", we can fully understand our very few attested examples of sentences involving so-called }{\i\lang1033 impersonal}{\lang1033  verbs. \tab 
In UT:396, Tolkien cites a verb }{\b\lang1033 \'f3la}{\lang1033 - "to drea
m", adding a brief remark to the effect that this verb is "impersonal". Precisely what he meant by this was long obscure, but now we have at least one example that may be helpful in this regard.
\par \tab The sentences in question involves the primary verb }{\b\lang1033 or}{\lang1033 - "urge, impel, move" (elsewhere also given as an A-stem }{\b\lang1033 ora}{\lang1033 -). The regular aorist }{\b\lang1033 or\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "urges, impels, moves" occurs in the sentence }{\b\lang1033 or\'eb nin caritas}{\lang1033 , translated "I would like to do so" or "I feel moved to do so". Literally it means "[it] impels for me to do it". Notice that this sentence has }{\i\lang1033 
no subject}{\lang1033  (though in our attempted literal translation, we had to fill in the dummy-subject "it" to achieve something like passable English \endash "it" has no real meaning here!) Quenya by its very grammatical construction indicat
es that the "urge" perceived by the speaker impacts on him from the outside, so to speak. }{\i\lang1033 Feeling}{\lang1033  }{\i\lang1033 moved}{\lang1033  to do something is not a deliberate "act" carried out by a subject; this feeling rather }{
\i\lang1033 affects}{\lang1033  the person involved, and in Quenya this is appropriately denoted by the }{\i\lang1033 dative}{\lang1033  case. In our attested example, a dative }{\i\lang1033 pronoun}{\lang1033 
 is involved, but we must assume that it could just as well be a regular noun: }{\b\lang1033 Or\'eb i Elda}{\b\ul\lang1033 n}{\b\lang1033  lelya}{\lang1033  = "[it] impels }{\ul\lang1033 for}{\lang1033 
 the Elf to go" = "the Elf feels moved to go". The verb is the first word of the sentence; normally the subject would come first, but here there simply isn't any subject.
\par \tab As for the impersonal verb }{\b\lang1033 \'f3la}{\lang1033 - "to dream", we must assume that the underlying idea is the same: Dreaming is not an "act" }{\i\lang1033 done}{\lang1033  by a subject, rather it is something that }{\i\lang1033 happens}{
\lang1033  to you; your dreams come to you quite independent of your own will, and therefore the dreamer is best presented as a person }{\i\lang1033 affected}{\lang1033 
 by his or her dreams: Hence dative for the dreamer! Tolkien gave us no examples involving }{\b\lang1033 \'f3la}{\lang1033 -, but "the maiden dreams about Elves" could perhaps be rendered something like }{\b\lang1033 \'f3la i venden Eldaron}{\lang1033 
 (notice that }{\b\lang1033 vend\'eb}{\lang1033  "maiden" here appears as a dative form, indicating that "the maiden" is perceived as the receiver of the dreams rather than as their maker \endash  cf.
 the use of the dative to denote the recipient in connection with the verb "to give").
\par \tab Such constructions, even in connection with the verb "to dream", are not unheard of in the languages of our own world. As David Kiltz wrote on the Elfling list (April 2
5, 2001): "The dative has many more functions than just that of an indirect object. It can...denote the 'subjective experiencer' as in...German }{\i\lang1033 mir ist kalt}{\lang1033 
 'I'm cold' where you [would] use a nominative for the logical subject in English but not in many other languages." }{\i\lang1033 Mir ist kalt}{\lang1033  means "to-me [it] is cold"; the German dative form }{\i\lang1033 mir}{\lang1033 
 corresponds to Quenya }{\b\lang1033 nin}{\lang1033 . Given that the Quenya word for "cold" is }{\b\lang1033 ringa}{\lang1033 , it is entirely possible that }{\i\lang1033 mir ist kalt}{\lang1033  can be rendered directly into Quenya as }{\b\lang1033 nin n
\'e1 ringa}{\lang1033  (or perhaps rather }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1 ringa nin}{\lang1033  "[it] is cold for me").
\par \tab We don't know very many Quenya verbs that invite such constructions, though. In the entry }{\i\lang1033 MBAW}{\lang1033 - in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 , Tolkien mentioned that the "Noldorin" verb }{\i\lang1033 bui}{\lang1033 
 "compel" is impersonal ("Noldorin" being the conceptual predecessor of the }{\i\lang1033 Sindarin}{\lang1033  language exemplified in LotR). The Quenya verb corresponding to "Noldorin" }{\i\lang1033 bui}{\lang1033  is given as }{\b\lang1033 mauya}{
\lang1033 
-. If this can also function as an impersonal verb (though it can probably occur with an explicit subject as well), we may have a clue as to how "I must" or "I need to" would be expressed in Quenya. Perhaps "I must go" would (or at least could) be express
ed as }{\b\lang1033 mauya nin lelya}{\lang1033  = "[it] compels for me to go".
\par \tab In some cases, it may not even be necessary to complement an impersonal verb with a dative noun or pronoun. Regarding a "Noldorin" form of the verb corresponding to Quenya }{\b\lang1033 ulya}{\lang1033 - "pour", namely }{\i\lang1033 oeil}{\lang1033 
 or }{\i\lang1033 eil}{\lang1033 , Tolkien noted that it was used for "it is raining" (Etym, entry }{\i\lang1033 ULU}{\lang1033 
). Again, English by grammatical necessity fills in a dummy-subject "it", but here there is obviously no real subject which actually "does" rain. Perhaps Quenya }{\b\lang1033 ulya}{\lang1033 , or continuative }{\b\lang1033 uly\'eba}{\lang1033 
, can likewise be used for "[it] is raining": The naked verb would be a full sentence in itself.
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 U-STEM VERBS}{\i\cf2\lang3081 
\par }{\lang1033 This is an obscure sub-group of verbs; having discussed U-stem nouns in the previous lesson, we may explore U-stem verbs now. Our data being very limited, this discussion must by necessity consist mainly of speculation.
\par \tab Verbal stems with the ending -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  are not uncommon in Tolkien's early "Qenya" material, but as the decades went by, he may seem to have cut down their number. Of the well over 1,200 Quenya words mentioned in the }{\i\lang1033 
Etymologies}{\lang1033 , there is only one single U-stem verb, namely }{\b\lang1033 palu}{\lang1033 - "open wide, spread, expand, extend" (and even this verb has an alternative form }{\b\lang1033 palya}{\lang1033 
- with the much more common verbal ending -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033 : see the entry }{\i\lang1033 PAL}{\lang1033 ). Around 1960, in his essay }{\i\lang1033 Quendi and Eldar}{\lang1033 , Tolkien mentioned the verb }{\b\lang1033 nicu}{\lang1033 
- "be chill, cold" with reference to weather (WJ:417). Some years later, he also used a few U-stem verbs in the latest version of the }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{\lang1033  poem: }{\b\lang1033 fif\'edru}{\lang1033 - "slowly fade away" (elaboration 
of the simpler verb }{\b\lang1033 fir}{\lang1033 - "die, fade"), }{\b\lang1033 hlapu}{\lang1033 - "fly or stream in the wind", }{\b\lang1033 nurru}{\lang1033 - "murmur, grumble" (MC:223).
\par \tab How are these verbs to be inflected? }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{\lang1033  as printed in MC:222 indicates that the active participle of }{\b\lang1033 hlapu}{\lang1033 - is }{\b\lang1033 hl\'e1pula}{\lang1033 , indicating that the
 active participle is formed by adding the normal ending -}{\b\lang1033 la}{\lang1033  and lengthening the main vowel if possible (}{\b\lang1033 hlapu}{\lang1033 - becoming }{\b\lang1033 hl\'e1pu}{\lang1033 -). The participle of }{\b\lang1033 nurru}{
\lang1033 - "murmur" is attested as }{\b\lang1033 nurrula}{\lang1033 ; here the vowel could not be lengthened because of the following consonant cluster (**}{\b\lang1033 n\'farrula}{\lang1033 
 being an impossible Quenya word). The formation of the active participle is just about the only thing we can be quite sure about regarding this class of verbs (and therefore also the only thing I touch on in the Translate-into-Quenya exercises below).

\par \tab The }{\i\lang1033 passive}{\lang1033  participle is problematic. The normal ending -}{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033  or its longer variant -}{\b\lang1033 ina}{\lang1033  would presumably be applied somehow. Some have argued that we }{\i\lang1033 may}{
\lang1033  have an attested example of the passive participle of a U-stem verb. We have earlier referred to the mysterious form }{\b\lang1033 tur\'fan'}{\lang1033  (obviously shortened from }{\b\lang1033 tur\'fana}{\lang1033 ) in Nienor's cry: }{
\b\lang1033 A T\'farin Turambar }{\b\ul\lang1033 tur\'fan'}{\b\lang1033  ambartanen}{\lang1033 , "[o T\'farin] master of doom by doom }{\ul\lang1033 mastered}{\lang1033 " (UT:138). A primary verb }{\b\lang1033 tur}{\lang1033 
- "wield, control, govern" does occur in Tolkien's material, but we would expect its passive participle to be }{\b\lang1033 turna}{\lang1033  (cf. }{\b\lang1033 carna}{\lang1033  "made" as the attested passive participle of }{\b\lang1033 car}{\lang1033 
- "make, do"). Could the strange form }{\b\lang1033 tur\'fana}{\lang1033  "mastered" actually be the passive participle of a variant }{\i\lang1033 U-stem}{\lang1033  verb }{\b\lang1033 turu}{\lang1033 
- "to master"? However, is not clear why adding the ending -}{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033  to }{\b\lang1033 turu}{\lang1033 - would produce }{\b\lang1033 tur}{\b\i\lang1033 \'fa}{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033  with a }{\i\lang1033 long}{\lang1033  vowel 
\endash  and other indirect evidence points in another direction. As has been pointed out by some, the ending -(}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 )}{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033  that is used to derive passive part
iciples also turns up in other parts of speech, and we have at least one example demonstrating what happens when it is added to a }{\i\lang1033 noun}{\lang1033  stem in -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 : The adjective }{\b\lang1033 culuina}{\lang1033 
 "orange" is derived from a root }{\i\lang1033 KUL}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 KULU}{\lang1033  "gold". Here a diphthong }{\b\lang1033 ui}{\lang1033  arises when the final -}{\i\lang1033 U}{\lang1033  of the stem is combined with the ending -}{\b\lang1033 
ina}{\lang1033 . Carrying this principle over to U-stem }{\i\lang1033 verbs}{\lang1033 , we could argue that the passive participle of }{\b\lang1033 palu}{\lang1033 - "expand" should be ?}{\b\lang1033 paluina}{\lang1033 
 "expanded". Analogy with A-stem verbs would point in the same direction (cf. }{\b\lang1033 hast}{\b\ul\lang1033 ai}{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033  "marred" as the attested participle of }{\b\lang1033 hasta}{\lang1033 - "to mar") \endash 
 but lacking attested examples, we cannot be sure.
\par \tab The }{\i\lang1033 infinitive}{\lang1033  is quite problematic. It ought to be a stem with no additions. In the previous lesson we pointed out that U-stem }{\i\lang1033 nouns}{\lang1033  originally ended in a short -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 
. This original vowel is preserved unchanged whenever some ending follows, but in Quenya it had turned into -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033  when it was absolutely final. Applying the same principle to U-stem }{\i\lang1033 verbs}{\lang1033 
, the infinitive of }{\b\lang1033 palu}{\lang1033 - "expand" could conceivably be ?}{\b\lang1033 palo}{\lang1033 . Of course, we would still see }{\b\lang1033 palu}{\lang1033 
- before endings, for instance if this class of verbs may also have extended forms in -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033 : hence ?}{\b\lang1033 paluta}{\lang1033 , or with an object ending ?}{\b\lang1033 paluta}{\b\ul\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 , "to expand }{
\ul\lang1033 it}{\lang1033 ".
\par \tab The }{\i\lang1033 aorist}{\lang1033  is little less obscure. As we remember, primary verbs assume the ending -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 , preserved as such before further endings, but turning into -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  when final (}{
\b\lang1033 sil\'eb}{\lang1033  "shines", but pl. }{\b\lang1033 silir}{\lang1033  "shine"). Since the phonological shift that makes an original final short -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  become -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  closely parallels the shi
ft that turns an original final short -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  into -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033 , we could plausibly argue that }{\b\lang1033 palu}{\lang1033 - "expand" ought to have the aorist ?}{\b\lang1033 palo}{\lang1033 
 "expands" (identical to the infinitive), preserved as ?}{\b\lang1033 palu}{\lang1033 - before any ending (e.g. }{\b\lang1033 palur}{\lang1033  "expand" with a plural subject, }{\b\lang1033 palun}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 paluny\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "I expand", }{\b\lang1033 palus}{\lang1033  "he/she/it expands", etc. etc.) However, one piece of evidence diverges from this scenario: After mentioning the U-stem verb }{\b\lang1033 nicu}{\lang1033 - "be chill, cold", Tolkien also cited the form }{
\b\lang1033 niqu\'eb}{\lang1033 , which he translated "it is cold, it freezes" (WJ:417). Is this verb }{\b\lang1033 niqu\'eb}{\lang1033  to be understood as the aorist form of }{\b\lang1033 nicu}{\lang1033 
-? Are we to understand that just as in the case of primary verbs, the ending -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  was added to the U-stem as well, and that a development }{\i\lang1033 nicui}{\lang1033  > }{\i\lang1033 nicwi}{\lang1033 
 ensued? After the change of final short -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  to -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033 , this would indeed produce the attested form (}{\i\lang1033 nicwe}{\lang1033  =) }{\b\lang1033 niqu\'eb}{\lang1033 . If so, the aorist of }{
\b\lang1033 palu}{\lang1033 - could be ?}{\b\lang1033 palw\'eb}{\lang1033 , or with endings ?}{\b\lang1033 palwi}{\lang1033 -. However, we may wonder why U-stem verbs take the aorist ending -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 
 when A-stems do not. This would not be encouraging for our nice little theory that the ending -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  is applied to primary verbs merely as a kind of stop-gap to make up for the lack of any other ending (for U-stem verbs obviously }{
\i\lang1033 do}{\lang1033  have another ending \endash  the -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  itself!) Indeed it was the form }{\b\lang1033 niqu\'eb}{\lang1033  I was thinking of when I warned the student back in Lesson Seven, }{\lang1033\cgrid0 
"This 'simplified' view is not wholly unproblematic, but it works most of the time." We have now reached the point where it may not work anymore.
\par \tab While the aorist of }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 palu}{\lang1033\cgrid0 - may plausibly be assumed to be ?}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 palw\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0  or with endings ?}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 palwi}{\lang1033\cgrid0 -, perfectly paralleling (}{
\i\lang1033\cgrid0 nicwe}{\lang1033\cgrid0  =) }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 niqu\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0  as the aorist of }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 nicu}{\lang1033\cgrid0 -, we can only wonder how verbs like }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 hlapu}{\lang1033\cgrid0 - or }{
\b\lang1033\cgrid0 nurru}{\lang1033\cgrid0 - would behave if they received the ending -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 i}{\lang1033\cgrid0  already in the primitive language. They could hardly evolve into **}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 nurrw\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0  or **}{
\b\lang1033\cgrid0 hlapw\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , which would be quite impossible Quenya words. Perhaps the original diphthong }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 ui}{\lang1033\cgrid0  would be preserved in all positions, and we would see ?}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 nurrui}{
\lang1033\cgrid0  and ?}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 hlapui}{\lang1033\cgrid0  with no change of -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 i}{\lang1033\cgrid0  to -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 \'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0  even where the vowel is absolutely final?
 However, I hardly have to tell the student that we have now entered the realm of Extreme Speculation.
\par \tab The }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 present}{\lang1033\cgrid0  tense must also be speculative, but Tolkien provided one excellent clue. It should be remembered that the present tense (e.g. }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 s\'edla}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 "is shining") actually represents a kind of "continuous" or "continuative" verbal stem, derived by lengthening the stem-vowel (if possible) and adding the ending -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 a}{\lang1033\cgrid0 . In the very last version of the }{
\i\lang1033\cgrid0 Markirya}{\lang1033\cgrid0  poem, Tolkien replaced one of the participles with what would seem to be a continuative stem: As is evident from Christopher Tolkien's annotation in MC:222, his father altered }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 nurrula}{
\lang1033\cgrid0  "mumbling, murmuring" to }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 nurrua}{\lang1033\cgrid0 . Here, the continuative stem in effect functions as a participle (still meaning "mumblin
g"), and the revision actually seems quite pointless, but at least Tolkien gave away that the ending -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 a}{\lang1033\cgrid0  may be added to a U-stem verb. In another context, }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 nurrua}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 could presumably have functioned as the present tense "is murmuring". In this case, the stem-vowel could not be lengthened because of the following consonant cluster, but the present tense of a verb like }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 palu}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
- "to expand" would in all likelihood be }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 p\'e1lua}{\lang1033\cgrid0  "is expanding".}{\lang1033 
\par \tab In the }{\i\lang1033 past}{\lang1033  tense we can be reasonably certain that the regular past tense ending -}{\b\lang1033 n\'eb}{\lang1033  would be added. At least this was the case in Tolkien's earliest "Qenya": The Qenya Lexicon of 1915 lists }{
\b\lang1033 allun\'eb}{\lang1033  as the past tense of the verb }{\b\lang1033 allu}{\lang1033 - "wash" (QL:30). I use this system in the exercises below (but only in the Translate-}{\i\lang1033 from}{\lang1033 -Quenya sec
tion, so at least I won't seduce my students into constructing uncertain Quenya verb forms themselves!)}{\i\lang1033 
\par }{\lang1033 \tab The }{\i\lang1033 perfect}{\lang1033  tense is obscure. The augment (the prefixed stem-vowel) would presumably be prefixed as usual, while the vowel would \endash  if possible \endash  be len
gthened in its normal position. So the perfect tenses of }{\b\lang1033 palu}{\lang1033 -, }{\b\lang1033 nurru}{\lang1033 - would presumably commence as }{\b\lang1033 ap\'e1l}{\lang1033 -, }{\b\lang1033 unurr}{\lang1033 
-. But what comes next is anybody's guess. How can the ending -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033  that is associated with the perfect tense be added to a U-stem verb? Would the initial -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 - of the ending merge with the final -}{
\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  of the verbal stem to form a diphthong -}{\b\lang1033 ui}{\lang1033 -, so that we would see ?}{\b\lang1033 unurrui\'eb}{\lang1033  for "has murmured"? The perfect tense "has expanded" could hardly be ?}{\b\lang1033 ap\'e1lui\'eb}
{\lang1033 , for the new diphthong }{\b\lang1033 ui}{\lang1033  would attract the stress and leave the syllable immediately before it completely unaccented. Then the long }{\b\lang1033 \'e1}{\lang1033 
 could hardly survive, for there seems to be a phonological rule prohibiting a long vowel in a completely unstressed syllable unless this is also the first syllable of the word \endash  and here it is not. Would we see ?}{\b\lang1033 apalui\'eb}{
\lang1033  with a short vowel, then? However, as we have argued earlier, the ending -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033  that is used in the perfect tense apparently displaces the final -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 
 when added to an A-stem verb, so it is entirely possible that it would also displace the final -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  of a U-stem. From }{\b\lang1033 nurru}{\lang1033 -, }{\b\lang1033 palu}{\lang1033 
- we would then simply see the perfect-tense forms }{\b\lang1033 unurri\'eb}{\lang1033  "has murmured", }{\b\lang1033 ap\'e1li\'eb}{\lang1033  "has expanded". (Likely, -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033  as a }{\i\lang1033 gerundial or infinitival}{
\lang1033  ending would likewise displace the final -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 , so that we could have ?}{\b\lang1033 nurri\'eb}{\lang1033  for "mumbling". But "mumbling" as a mere verbal noun could almost certainly be }{\b\lang1033 nurrul\'eb}{
\lang1033 , though attested examples of the abstract ending -}{\b\lang1033 l\'eb}{\lang1033  "-ing" involve A-stems instead.)
\par \tab In the }{\i\lang1033 future}{\lang1033  tense we would presumably see the usual ending -}{\b\lang1033 uva}{\lang1033 . However, we can only speculate as to whether the initial -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 
- of the ending would simply merge with the final -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  of the stem, so that the future tense of }{\b\lang1033 palu}{\lang1033 - would be }{\b\lang1033 paluva}{\lang1033 , or whether the two }{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 
's would combine to form one }{\i\lang1033 long}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 \'fa}{\lang1033 , so that we would see }{\b\lang1033 pal\'fava}{\lang1033  instead.
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 THE VARIOUS USES OF }{\b\i\cf2\lang3081 L\'c1}{\i\cf2\lang3081 
\par }{\lang1033 In Lesson Nine, we introduced the negative verb }{\b\lang1033 um}{\lang1033 - "not do, not be" (past tense }{\b\lang1033 \'fam\'eb}{\lang1033  according to Etym., future tense }{\b\lang1033 \'fava}{\lang1033  according to }{\i\lang1033 F\'ed
riel's Song}{\lang1033 ). In all examples and exercises so far, we h
ave used this verb + infinitive whenever a sentence is to be negated. However, using the negative verb is not the only option available in this regard. Like English, Quenya does have a separate word for "not", namely }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033  (or }{
\b\lang1033 la}{\lang1033  when unstressed). This word may also be used for "no".
\par \tab The negative verb }{\b\lang1033 um}{\lang1033 - and the separate negation }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033  clearly coexist in the language, since both were listed in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033  (entries }{\i\lang1033 UGU}{\lang1033 /}{
\i\lang1033 UMU}{\lang1033  vs. }{\i\lang1033 LA}{\lang1033 ). There are hardly any very specific rules for when to use one or the other. If one uses the negative verb }{\b\lang1033 um}{\lang1033 
-, it apparently takes the relevant endings for tense and pronoun, while the verb it negates presumably appears as an infinitive: }{\b\lang1033 \'damen lelya}{\lang1033 , "I didn't }{\i\lang1033 [first person past tense]}{\lang1033  go }{\i\lang1033 
[inf.]}{\lang1033 ". If one uses the separate negation }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033 , the verb that is to be negated would itself receive all relevant endings, just as if no negation were present: }{\b\lang1033 Lenden}{\lang1033 
 "I went" could be negated as }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1 lenden}{\lang1033  or}{\b\lang1033  }{\lang1033 = "Not I went" = "I didn't go". (Our few examples suggest that the preferred word order is to place }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033  }{\i\lang1033 before}{
\lang1033  the verb that is to be negated, though for all we know, }{\b\lang1033 lenden l\'e1}{\lang1033  "I went not" would also be acceptable. But one should not use an alternative word-order where ambiguity can arise; see below.)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 This is obviously an easier way to negate a sen
tence than using the negative verb + infinitive; one simply starts with the non-negated sentence and slips in one extra word. Indeed I introduce the word }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033 
 this late in the course partly because I didn't want to "spoil" my students with this easy-to-const
ruct negation before they had the chance to get familiar with the negative verb. In many cases, using the negative verb may seem like the more elegant method of negating sentences, and sometimes the word }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033 
 "not" should perhaps be avoided because a similar form also has a quite different function (see below). Yet in some contexts it may be best to use }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033 
 instead of the negative verb. In particular, it may seem strange to construct the verb }{\b\lang1033 um}{\lang1033 - as a present or "continuative" form, corresponding to the English "is ...-ing" construction. The form would be }{\b\lang1033 \'fama}{
\lang1033 , but should "the Elf is not watching the Dwarf" be translated }{\b\lang1033 i Elda \'fama tir\'eb i Nauco}{\lang1033 ? I guess anything is possible, but think I would rather start with the positive sentence }{\b\lang1033 i Elda t\'edra i Nauco}
{\lang1033  and negate it by slipping in }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033  in front of the verb: }{\b\lang1033 I Elda l\'e1 t\'edra i Nauco}{\lang1033 . Likewise, it may be best to use the negation }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033  in the }{\i\lang1033 
perfect}{\lang1033  tense, especially since it is slightly uncertain what the perfect form of }{\b\lang1033 um}{\lang1033 - would be: ?}{\b\lang1033 \'fami\'eb}{\lang1033  with no augment since the stem begins in a vowel, or perhaps ?}{\b\lang1033 um\'fa
mi\'eb}{\lang1033  with the entire initial syllable repeated? In any case, "I have not come" is perhaps best expressed as }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1 ut\'falien}{\lang1033 . Though (}{\b\lang1033 um}{\lang1033 )}{\b\lang1033 \'famien tul\'eb}{\lang1033 
 should be intelligible, it seems like a rather weird construction.
\par Translating from Quenya to English one must sometimes take care to connect the negation }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033  with the right verb. Notice the sentence }{\b\lang1033 alasaila n\'e1 l\'e1 car\'eb tai mo nav\'eb m\'e1ra}{\lang1033 
, translated "it is unwise not to do what one judges good". (VT42:34; }{\b\lang1033 mo}{\lang1033  is there said to be an indefinite pronoun "somebody, one", apparently an alternative to }{\b\lang1033 quen}{\lang1033 . More obscure is the form }{
\b\lang1033 tai}{\lang1033 , which as we argued above may be a plural form of }{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033  "that, it", hence "those". If so, the sentence literally means "unwise [it] i
s not [to] do those [things which] one judges good". Notice the element }{\b\lang1033 ala}{\lang1033 - "un-" here prefixed to }{\b\lang1033 saila}{\lang1033  "wise"; it is of course related to the negation }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033 
.) For a person used to English word order, it might be tempting to interpret the words }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1 l\'e1}{\lang1033  as a connected phrase "is not" and mistranslate **"it }{\i\lang1033 is not}{\lang1033 
 unwise to do what one judges good". However, if one bears in mind that }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033  connects with the }{\i\lang1033 following}{\lang1033  verb, in this case the infinitive }{\b\lang1033 car\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "to do", the misunderstanding can be avoided: The phrases are correctly divided as }{\b\lang1033 alasaila n\'e1}{\lang1033  "unwise [it] is" + }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1 car\'eb}{\lang1033 ... "not to do..." (etc.)
\par As this example shows, }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033  may be used to negate infinitives as well, and another example from VT42:34 indicates that it makes no difference if the infinitive is extended with the ending -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033 
 to receive an object suffix: }{\b\ul\lang1033 l\'e1 caritas}{\b\lang1033 , navin, alasaila n\'e1}{\lang1033  \endash  literally "}{\ul\lang1033 not to do it}{\lang1033 
, I deem, unwise is". Tolkien himself offered the translation "not doing this would be (I think) unwise". In one example, Tolkien even used }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033  to negate an extended infinitive in -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033  that has }{
\i\lang1033 no}{\lang1033  pronominal object ending attached: }{\b\ul\lang1033 l\'e1 carita}{\b\lang1033  i hamil m\'e1ra alasaila n\'e1}{\lang1033 , "}{\ul\lang1033 not to do}{\lang1033 
 what you judge good would be [literally 'is'] unwise" (VT42:33). Here the extended infinitive }{\b\lang1033 carita}{\lang1033  takes on the meaning of a }{\i\lang1033 gerund}{\lang1033 , the entire relative sentence }{\b\lang1033 i hamil m\'e1ra}{
\lang1033  "that [which] you judge good" being its object. It seems, then, very likely that }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033  can also be used to negate also the more regular gerund in -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033 . We have no examples, but perhaps }{
\b\ul\lang1033 l\'e1 cari\'eb}{\b\lang1033  i hamil m\'e1ra}{\lang1033 ... would be an equally possible wording.
\par As for the }{\i\lang1033 unstressed}{\lang1033  variant of the negation }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033 , namely its shorter form }{\b\lang1033 la}{\lang1033 , our sole certain attestation of it occurs in the sentence }{\b\lang1033 la navin caritalyas m
\'e1ra}{\lang1033 , "I don't judge your doing it good" (VT42:33; this is a way of expressing "I do not advise you to do so"). Here the main stress presumably falls on the first syllable of the verb }{\b\lang1033 navin}{\lang1033  "I judge", the negation }
{\b\lang1033 la}{\lang1033  receiving no stress. One would think, however, that an important word like the negation (totally revers
ing the meaning of the sentence!) would normally receive some stress, and in the exercises below, I have consistently used the long/accented form }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033 .
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par The short form }{\b\lang1033 la}{\lang1033  would however have one thing to recommend it, namely that it would not clash with a quite distinct word }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033 , which is used in phrases having to do with }{\i\lang1033 comparison}{
\lang1033  (though material appearing in }{\i\lang1033 Tyali\'eb Tyellelli\'e9va}{\lang1033  #16 seems to indicate that this second }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033  may also occur as a shorter form }{\b\lang1033 la}{\lang1033 
). According to Bill Welden's article }{\i\lang1033 Negation in Quenya}{\lang1033  (VT42:32-34), Tolkien was indeed somewhat troubled by this clash, and for a while he actually abandoned the negation }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033 
 "no, not". However, in the last years of his life he reintroduced it, so we must live with the double function of this word. In context, it is hardly difficult to distinguish between the two }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033 's. 
\par \tab According to a otherwise unpublished Tolkien manuscript cited by Welden in his article, the formula "}{\i\lang1033 A}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033 )}{\b\lang1033  calima l\'e1}{\lang1033  }{\i\lang1033 B}{\lang1033 " can be used for "}{
\i\lang1033 A}{\lang1033  is brighter than }{\i\lang1033 B}{\lang1033 " (notice that the copula }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033  "is" may be left out and understood). If we want a full sentence with no algebra, we may fill in }{\i\lang1033 A}{\lang1033 
 and }{\i\lang1033 B}{\lang1033  to produce (say) }{\b\lang1033 Anar n\'e1 calima l\'e1 Isil}{\lang1033 , "[the] Sun is brighter than [the] Moon". However, this English translation differs from the actual Quenya wording in these respects: }{\b\lang1033 
Calima}{\lang1033  is the simple adjective "bright", not the comparative form "brighter" (we are still not certain what }{\i\lang1033 that}{\lang1033  would look like), and }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033 
 does not really mean "than". We are told that this }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033  is properly a preposition "beyond", so the Quenya sentence actually means "the Sun is bright beyond the Moon".
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 We can certainly imagine sentences including }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033  occurring with both its meanings: }{\b\lang1033 I mindon }{\b\cf6\lang1033 l\'e1}{\b\lang1033  n\'e1 halla }{
\b\cf2\lang1033 l\'e1}{\b\lang1033  i oron}{\lang1033 , "the tower is }{\cf6\lang1033 not}{\lang1033  taller }{\cf2\lang1033 than}{\lang1033  the mountain" (literally "...
tall beyond the mountain"). Here the negative verb would certainly be preferable, if only for stylistic reasons: }{\b\lang1033 I mindon um\'eb halla l\'e1 i oron}{\lang1033 . It may be possible to circumvent the ambiguities. We are told that instead of }{
\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033  "beyond" in phrases of comparison, one may also use the preposition }{\b\lang1033 ep\'eb}{\lang1033  "before" \endash 
 erroneously glossed "after" in Welden's article. Irrespective of this error, there actually is some evidence suggesting that }{\b\lang1033 ep\'eb}{\lang1033  or a similar form did mean "after" at one point of Tolkien's ever-evolving l
inguistic scenario (apparently it was a variant of the }{\b\lang1033 apa}{\lang1033  introduced in Lesson Fifteen). Because of the uncertainties relating to }{\b\lang1033 ep\'eb}{\lang1033 , we will let it rest in peace here, and use }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{
\lang1033  despite its ambiguity.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\cf2\lang3081 
\par }{\i\cf2\lang3081 Summary of Lesson Eighteen:}{\lang3081  In addition to the pronominal }{\i\lang3081 endings}{\lang3081  discussed earlier in this course, Quenya also has various }{\i\lang3081 independent}{\lang3081 
 pronouns (see Vocabulary section below). A pronoun like }{\b\lang3081 me}{\lang3081  "we" or "us" can receive endings for case (e.g. dative }{\b\lang3081 men}{\lang3081  "for us, to us") or, where two persons are concerned, dual endings (e.g. }{
\b\lang3081 met}{\lang3081  "[the two of] us"). \endash  Some Quenya verbs are }{\i\lang3081 impersonal}{\lang3081 , requiring no subject, but where someone is nonetheless affected by the verbal action, this someone can be mentioned as a }{\i\lang3081 
dative}{\lang3081  form: }{\b\lang3081 Ora }{\b\ul\lang3081 nin}{\lang3081  = "[it] impels }{\ul\lang3081 for me}{\lang3081 " = "I feel moved [to do something]". \endash  Quenya }{\i\lang3081 U-stem}{\lang3081  verbs, like }{\b\lang3081 hlap}{
\b\ul\lang3081 u}{\lang3081 - "fly [in the wind]", form a particularly obscure group of verbs. The only thing that is known with full certainty about such verbs is that the active participle is formed by means of the normal ending -}{\b\lang3081 la}{
\lang3081 , combined with lengthening of the main vowel of the verb (unless it has to remain short because of a following consonant cluster; thus the participle of }{\b\lang3081 nurru}{\lang3081 - "grumble" is simply }{\b\lang3081 n}{\b\ul\lang3081 u}{
\b\lang3081 rrula}{\lang3081 , though the participle of }{\b\lang3081 hlapu}{\lang3081 - is }{\b\lang3081 hl}{\b\ul\lang3081 \'e1}{\b\lang3081 pula}{\lang3081 ). Early material suggests that the }{\i\lang3081 past tense}{\lang3081 
 of U-stem verbs is formed by adding the past tense ending -}{\b\lang3081 n\'eb}{\lang3081 , though we have no examples from the more LotR-compatible forms of Quenya. \endash  The word }{\b\lang3081 l\'e1}{\lang3081 
 has various uses. It can be used as a negation "not" (apparently placed in front of the word, usually the verb, that is to be negated). }{\b\lang3081 L\'e1}{\lang3081  is also a preposition "beyond", and as such it is used in phrases having to do with }{
\i\lang3081 comparison}{\lang3081  \endash  VT42:32 citing the formula "A }{\b\lang3081 n\'e1 calima l\'e1}{\lang3081  B" for "A is brighter than B" (literally "A is bright beyond B" \endash  notice that the adjective }{\b\lang3081 calima}{\lang3081 
 "bright" appears in its simplest form, with no ending corresponding to the -}{\i\lang3081 er}{\lang3081  of "brighter").}{\b\lang3081 
\par }{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 VOCABULARY
\par }{\lang3081 To cover all the attested ordinal numbers, we will introduce two at a time in this and the last two lessons.
\par 
\par }{\b\lang3081 lemp\'eba}{\lang3081  "fifth"
\par }{\b\lang3081 enqu\'eba}{\lang3081  "sixth"}{\fs20\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 urco}{\lang3081  (}{\b\lang3081 urcu}{\lang3081 -) "bogey"
\par }{\b\lang3081 l\'e1}{\lang3081  1) negation "not", 2) preposition "beyond", also used in comparison
\par }{\b\lang3081 ni}{\lang3081  independent pronoun "I", object form }{\b\lang3081 nye}{\lang3081  "me"
\par }{\b\lang3081 le}{\lang3081  independent pronoun "you" (plural }{\i\lang3081 or}{\lang3081  polite singular), probably unchanged when used as object
\par }{\b\lang3081 tye}{\lang3081  independent object pronoun "you", "thee" }{\fs20\lang3081 (intimate singular)
\par }{\b\lang3081 me}{\lang3081  independent pronoun "we" (exclusive, cf. the ending -}{\b\lang3081 mm\'eb}{\lang3081 ), probably unchanged when used as object "us"
\par }{\b\lang3081 ta}{\lang3081  independent pronoun "it" or "that", probably unchanged when used as object; the allative }{\b\lang3081 tanna}{\lang3081  may be used = "thither". This pronoun may have the plural form ?}{\b\lang3081 tai}{\lang3081 
 "those", of which }{\b\lang3081 te}{\lang3081  "them" could be an unstressed form (alternatively, }{\i\lang3081 tai}{\lang3081  may be an archaic form which had evolved into }{\b\lang3081 te}{\lang3081 
 in all positions; we will only use the attested form }{\b\lang3081 te}{\lang3081  here). This plural pronoun assumes the form }{\b\lang3081 tie}{\lang3081 - before case endings (or at least before the dative ending -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 )
\par }{\b\lang3081 palu}{\lang3081 - "to expand"
\par }{\b\lang3081 or}{\lang3081 - (also }{\b\lang3081 ora}{\lang3081 -) "to urge, to impel" }{\fs20\lang3081 (impersonal verb; used with a dative form to express "[someone] feels moved [to do something]")}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 \'f3la}{\lang3081 - "to dream" }{\fs20\lang3081 (impersonal verb; the dreamer is apparently introduced as a dative form)
\par }{\lang3081 
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 EXERCISES
\par }{\lang3081 Notice that in the exercises below, as well as in the keys, we use "you" as the English equivalent of Quenya "L"-form pronouns (plural, or polite singular, "you"), whereas "thee" is used as the equivalent of the intimate singular object form }
{\b\lang3081 tye}{\lang3081 . \endash  As for }{\i\lang3081 negations}{\lang3081 , we will here practice the independent negation }{\b\lang3081 l\'e1}{\lang3081  instead of using the negative verb. \endash  We do not here use independent }{\i\lang3081 
subject}{\lang3081  pronouns, only the pronominal endings discussed earlier.
\par 
\par 1. Translate into English:
\par 
\par }{\i\lang3081 A.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Ut\'falient\'eb cenien me, l\'e1 cenien tye.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 B.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Nai \'f3luva len Eldaron!
\par }{\i\lang3081 C}{\lang3081 . }{\b\lang3081 Neld\'eb neri lelyuvar tanna, ar i Naucor tiruvar te, an i neri haryar harma i n\'e1 alta l\'e1 malta.}{\i\lang3081 
\par D.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 I enqu\'eba auress\'eb orn\'eb tien tul\'eb ninna.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 E.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 I enqu\'eba aran i n\'f3r\'ebo n\'e1 saila l\'e1 atarerya i lemp\'eba aran.}{\i\lang3081 
\par F.}{\b\lang3081  Palunes coarya, c\'e1rala ta i analta coa i mall\'ebo.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 G.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Carnelyes tien; l\'e1 carnelyes men.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 H.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Cennemm\'eb le i cilyass\'eb nu me, an lantanely\'eb mir ta.}{\lang3081 
\par 
\par 2. Translate into Quenya:
\par 
\par }{\i\lang3081 I.}{\lang3081  My right arm is stronger than my left arm.
\par }{\i\lang3081 J.}{\lang3081  Summon them to }{\i\lang3081 [allative]}{\lang3081  me!
\par }{\i\lang3081 K.}{\lang3081  The bogies are watching me, for I fear them }{\i\lang3081 [Quenya: "fear }{\i\ul\lang3081 from}{\i\lang3081  them", ablative]}{\lang3081 .}{\b\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 L.}{\lang3081  We }{\i\lang3081 [exclusive]}{\lang3081  will not come to see thee in the night.
\par }{\i\lang3081 M.}{\lang3081  The boy will not dream about }{\i\lang3081 [genitive]}{\lang3081  bogies.}{\fs20\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 N}{\lang3081 . The two women said: "Your king did not want to give us }{\i\lang3081 [dual dative]}{\lang3081  the things taken [or, "seized" \endash  }{\b\lang3081 mapain\'eb}{\lang3081 , pl.] from us }{\i\lang3081 [dual ablative]}{
\lang3081  by his warriors."
\par }{\i\lang3081 O}{\lang3081 . The man expanding his house is doing that [or, it] (in order) to make many rooms for }{\i\lang3081 [dative]}{\lang3081  all his things.}{\i\lang3081 
\par P}{\lang3081 . The sixth day will be [}{\b\lang3081 nauva}{\lang3081 ] better than the fifth day, and we }{\i\lang3081 [exclusive]}{\lang3081  will not feel moved to leave [}{\b\lang3081 auta}{\lang3081 ]. }{\i\lang3081 ["Better than" = "good beyond"!]}{
\i\lang1033 
\par }{\lang1033 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs36\cf6\lang3081 LESSON NINETEEN }{\b\fs32\lang3081 
\par Pronouns in imperative phrases. Emphatic pronouns. Question-words: }{\b\i\fs32\lang3081 Man}{\b\fs32\lang3081 , }{\b\i\fs32\lang3081 mana}{\b\fs32\lang3081 , }{\b\i\fs32\lang3081 manen}{\b\fs32\lang3081 . Postpositions.
\par }{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 PRONOUNS IN IMPERATIVE PHRASES}{\b\fs20\cf2\lang3081  }{\lang1033 
\par Imperative phrases may include pronominal elements. These pronouns may refer either the }{\i\lang1033 subject}{\lang1033  of the imperative phrase (the party that is asked or ordered to do something), or to the direct or indirect }{\i\lang1033 object}{
\lang1033  of the requested action.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Optional subject pronouns may be slipped in to make it clear whether the speaker wants }{\i\lang1033 one}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 several}{\lang1033 
 persons to do something. Starting from the imperative exclamation }{\b\lang1033 heca!}{\lang1033  "be gone!" or "stand aside!", Tolkien noted that this word "often" appeared in an extended form "with reduced pronominal affixes of the
 2nd person" (WJ:364). If a }{\i\lang1033 single person}{\lang1033  is the addressee of an imperative, it can receive the suffix -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  (doubtless related to the singular object pronoun }{\b\lang1033 tye}{\lang1033 
 "thee"). So whereas the imperative }{\b\lang1033 heca!}{\lang1033  may be directed at one person or several, the extended form }{\b\lang1033 hecat!}{\lang1033  is explicitly marked as singular. It may be translated "get thee gone!" (Perhaps F\'eb
anor's harsh dismissal of Melkor when the latter came to Formenos, translated "get }{\ul\lang1033 thee}{\lang1033  gone from my gate" near the end of Chapter 7 of the }{\i\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\lang1033 , went something like }{\b\lang1033 heca}{
\b\ul\lang1033 t}{\b\lang1033  andonyallo}{\lang1033  in the original Quenya?) Tolkien further noted that in the plural, the simple imperative }{\b\lang1033 heca!}{\lang1033  could receive the ending -}{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 , so }{\b\lang1033 hecal!}{
\lang1033  is an order with }{\i\lang1033 several}{\lang1033  addressees: "Be gone, [all of] you!" These examples also demonstrat
e that when he wrote this, Tolkien had come to see the distinction between the "T"-forms and the "L"-forms of the Second Person as being primarily a distinction between singular and plural "you". Of course, matters are slightly muddied by the fact that "L
"-forms like the ending -}{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 ly\'eb}{\lang1033  also function as a }{\i\lang1033 polite singular}{\lang1033  "you" (translated "thou" in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 
). Of course, none can say whether the ending -}{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033  could be used in an imperative phrase to denote a "polite" order with a single addressee.
\par }{\b\lang1033 Hecat!}{\lang1033  sg. and }{\b\lang1033 hecal!}{\lang1033  pl. are our only attested examples of this use of the endings -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  and -}{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 . The imperative }{\b\lang1033 heca!}{\lang1033 
 is perhaps not a very typical imperative. As outlined in Lesson Sixteen, instead of the ending -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  an independent imperative particle }{\b\lang1033 \'e1}{\lang1033  (or }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 
) is normally employed, combined with a following verbal stem. Attested examples include }{\b\lang1033 \'e1 vala!}{\lang1033  "rule!" and }{\b\lang1033 a laita!}{\lang1033  "praise!" If the endings -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 l}{
\lang1033  are to be slipped into such a phrase, they must probably be attached to the verbal stem, e.g. }{\b\lang1033 a laitat!}{\lang1033  "praise!" (to one person), }{\b\lang1033 a laital!}{\lang1033  "praise!" (to several persons).
\par }{\b\lang1033 Laita}{\lang1033 - "bless, praise" is of course an A-stem. Primary verbs like }{\b\lang1033 car}{\lang1033 - "make, do" appear with the ending -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  in such commands, as is evident from the negative imperative }{
\b\lang1033 \'e1va car}{\b\ul\lang1033 \'eb}{\b\lang1033 !}{\lang1033  "don't do [it]!" (WJ:371). This -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  almost certainly comes from an earlier -}{\i\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 , and before endings we would still see -}{
\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 -, just as in the aorist of these verbs. Hence probably }{\b\lang1033 \'e1va car}{\b\ul\lang1033 i}{\b\lang1033 t!}{\lang1033  "don't do [it]!" (to one person), plural }{\b\lang1033 \'e1va car}{\b\ul\lang1033 i}{\b\lang1033 l!}{
\lang1033  "don't do [it!]" (to several persons). Or with a positive command like }{\b\lang1033 \'e1 tul\'eb!}{\lang1033  "come!", we could likewise have }{\b\lang1033 \'e1 tul}{\b\ul\lang1033 i}{\b\lang1033 t!}{\lang1033 
 if one person is asked to come, whereas }{\b\lang1033 \'e1 tul}{\b\ul\lang1033 i}{\b\lang1033 l!}{\lang1033  would refer to more than one: "Come ye!"
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par An imperative phrase may also include pronominal elements referring to the direct or indirect }{\i\lang1033 object}{\lang1033  of the requested action. In the previous lesson we referred to various independent pronouns. }{\b\lang1033 Nye}{\lang1033 
 "me", }{\b\lang1033 me}{\lang1033  "us", }{\b\lang1033 le}{\lang1033  "you", }{\b\lang1033 tye}{\lang1033  "thee", }{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033  "it" and }{\b\lang1033 te}{\lang1033 
 "them" can all appear as independent words; indeed our sole attestation of }{\b\lang1033 te}{\lang1033  "them" involves an imperative phrase where this word occurs by itself: }{\b\lang1033 A laita te, laita te!}{\lang1033 
 "bless them, bless them!" (from the Cormallen Praise). However, Tolkien's Quenya rendering of the Lord's Prayer indicates that object pronouns may also appear }{\i\lang1033 suffixed}{\lang1033  to the imperative particle }{\b\lang1033 \'e1}{\lang1033 
. The principle can be illustrated by a home-made example: Consider a simple imperative phrase like }{\b\lang1033 \'e1 tir\'eb!}{\lang1033  "watch!" If we want to say "watch them", slipping in the object pronoun }{\b\lang1033 te}{\lang1033 
, it would be possible to let it follow the verb (as in the attested example }{\b\lang1033 a laita te}{\lang1033  "bless them"), hence }{\b\lang1033 \'e1 tir\'eb te}{\lang1033 
. However, it would apparently be equally permissible to let the object pronoun come before the verb, in which case it glues itself to the imperative particle }{\b\lang1033 \'e1}{\lang1033 . "Watch them!" could therefore be }{\b\lang1033 \'e1t\'eb tir\'eb
!}{\lang1033  
\par }{\fs20\lang1033 NOTE: Since }{\b\fs20\lang1033 te}{\fs20\lang1033  "them" now becomes the final syllable of a word of several syllables, the spelling conventions we have adopted require that the final -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 e}{\fs20\lang1033 
 is here spelt with a diaeresis: -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 \'eb}{\fs20\lang1033 . The same would apply to the final -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 e}{\fs20\lang1033  of the object pronouns }{\b\fs20\lang1033 nye}{\fs20\lang1033 , }{\b\fs20\lang1033 me}{\fs20\lang1033 , }{
\b\fs20\lang1033 le}{\fs20\lang1033 , }{\b\fs20\lang1033 tye}{\fs20\lang1033  if they were directly suffixed to }{\b\fs20\lang1033 \'e1}{\fs20\lang1033  \endash  e.g. }{\b\fs20\lang1033 \'e1}{\b\fs20\ul\lang1033 m\'eb}{\b\fs20\lang1033  tir\'eb}{
\fs20\lang1033  "watch }{\fs20\ul\lang1033 us}{\fs20\lang1033 ".  Of course, this is just an orthographic complication that has nothing to do with the structure of the language: In many texts, Tolkien does not use the diaeresis at all.}{\i\fs20\lang1033 

\par }{\lang1033 
\par Also }{\i\lang1033 dative}{\lang1033  pronouns (like }{\b\lang1033 nin}{\lang1033  "to/for me", }{\b\lang1033 men}{\lang1033  "to/for us", }{\b\lang1033 tien}{\lang1033  "to/for them") can be directly suffixed to the imperative particle }{\b\lang1033 \'e1
}{\lang1033 ; at least Tolkien's Quenya Lord's Prayer contains an example of }{\b\lang1033 men}{\lang1033  being so suffixed. A phrase like, say, "sing for us!" could thus be rendered }{\b\lang1033 \'e1men linda!}{\lang1033  
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
What happens if an imperative phrase contains two pronouns, denoting both the direct and the indirect object? We have no Tolkien-made example to guide us, but the imperative particle can hardly receive more than one pronominal suffix, and the example }{
\b\lang1033 a laita te}{\lang1033  indicates that a pronoun does not necessarily }{\i\lang1033 have}{\lang1033  to be suffixed to the particle. So it would certainly be permissible to let one of the pronouns, for either direct or indirect object, remain
 an independent word and suffix only the other pronoun to the particle }{\b\lang1033 \'e1}{\lang1033 . "Do }{\cf2\lang1033 it}{\lang1033  }{\cf6\lang1033 for me}{\lang1033 !" could then be either }{\b\lang1033 \'e1}{\b\cf6\lang1033 nin}{\b\lang1033  car
\'eb }{\b\cf2\lang1033 ta}{\b\lang1033 !}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 \'e1}{\b\cf2\lang1033 ta}{\b\lang1033  car\'eb }{\b\cf6\lang1033 nin}{\b\lang1033 !}{\lang1033 , according to preference. (Perhaps one could also say }{\b\lang1033 \'e1}{
\b\cf6\lang1033 nin}{\b\lang1033  carita}{\b\cf2\lang1033 s}{\b\lang1033 !}{\lang1033 , using an extended verbal stem }{\b\lang1033 carita}{\lang1033 - and the suffix -}{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  for "it".)
\par Tolkien's translation of "do not lead us into temptation" in his Quenya Lord's Prayer reveals that the negated form of the imperative particle ("do not!") can also receive pronominal affixes. By ca. 1960, in }{\i\lang1033 Quendi and Eldar}{\lang1033 
, Tolkien used }{\b\lang1033 \'e1va}{\lang1033  as the negative imperative, combining the particle }{\b\lang1033 \'e1}{\lang1033  with the negation }{\b\lang1033 v\'e1}{\lang1033  (-}{\b\lang1033 va}{\lang1033 
). In his earlier Lord's Prayer rendering he used a slightly different word for "do not" (incorporating the negation }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033  instead of }{\b\lang1033 v\'e1}{\lang1033 
), but there is no reason to doubt that pronouns denoting the direct or indirect object can be attached to the later form }{\b\lang1033 \'e1va}{\lang1033  as well. So while "watch }{\ul\lang1033 us}{\lang1033 !" could evidently be translated }{
\b\lang1033 \'e1}{\b\ul\lang1033 m\'eb}{\b\lang1033  tir\'eb!}{\lang1033 , the negative command "don't watch }{\ul\lang1033 us}{\lang1033 !" may probably be translated }{\b\lang1033 \'e1va}{\b\ul\lang1033 m\'eb}{\b\lang1033  tir\'eb!}{\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 EMPHATIC PRONOUNS}{\i\cf2\lang3081 
\par }{\lang1033 In the previous lesson, we discussed a number of independent pronouns (also mentioned in the section above). There also exist certain other pronouns that likewise appear as separate words, though they are closely relat
ed to the corresponding pronominal endings. These words function as }{\i\lang1033 emphatic}{\lang1033  pronouns.
\par \tab Consider the final lines of }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 : }{\b\lang1033 Nai hiruvaly\'eb Valimar! Nai ely\'eb hiruva!}{\lang1033  In LotR, Tolkien provided the translation "maybe thou shalt find Valimar! Maybe even thou s
halt find it!" Of course, }{\b\lang1033 hiruvaly\'eb}{\lang1033  means "thou shalt find" \endash  "thou" being expressed by means of the pronominal ending -}{\b\lang1033 ly\'eb}{\lang1033 . But then this is repeated as }{\b\lang1033 nai }{\b\ul\lang1033 
ely\'eb}{\b\lang1033  hiruva}{\lang1033 , "maybe }{\ul\lang1033 even thou}{\lang1033  shalt find [it]". Notice how the ending -}{\b\lang1033 ly\'eb}{\lang1033  is replaced by the independent word }{\b\lang1033 ely\'eb}{\lang1033 
, which is obviously closely related. }{\b\lang1033 Ely\'eb}{\lang1033  means simply "thou" or "you", but with special emphasis on this pronoun. Using such an independent form is like italicizing the pronoun in English: "Maybe [none other than] }{
\i\lang1033 thou}{\lang1033  shalt find." Tolkien used the translation "}{\ul\lang1033 even}{\lang1033  thou", adding an extra word, to bring out the emphatic quality of the pronoun. (The shorter independent word for "you, thou", }{\b\lang1033 le}{
\lang1033 , is apparently not emphatic.)
\par \tab Another independent emphatic pronoun is }{\b\lang1033 iny\'eb}{\lang1033  "I" \endash  or, since it is
 emphatic, rather "I myself" or "even I", "I and no one else". In LR:61, Herendil tells his father Elendil that he loves him, and Elendil responds in Quenya: }{\b\lang1033 A yonya }{\b\ul\lang1033 iny\'eb}{\b\lang1033  tye-m\'e9la}{\lang1033 , "and }{
\ul\lang1033 I too}{\lang1033 , my son, I love thee" (the initial }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 , apparently translated "and", would seem to be a variant of the more usual word }{\b\lang1033 ar}{\lang1033  \endash  though }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 
 can also be a particle of address). Here the pronoun }{\b\lang1033 iny\'eb}{\lang1033 , translated "I too" by Tolkien, gives special emphasis to Elendil's own identity: "}{\i\lang1033 I}{\lang1033  love you [just as you love me]". }{\b\lang1033 Iny\'eb}{
\lang1033  is more emphatic than the shorter form }{\b\lang1033 ni}{\lang1033 , just like }{\b\lang1033 ely\'eb}{\lang1033  is more emphatic than }{\b\lang1033 le}{\lang1033 .
\par \tab The form }{\b\lang1033 iny\'eb}{\lang1033  is obviously related to the pronominal ending -}{\b\lang1033 ny\'eb}{\lang1033 , and }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  clearly demonstrates that }{\b\lang1033 ely\'eb}{\lang1033 
 corresponds to the ending -}{\b\lang1033 ly\'eb}{\lang1033 . (Draft versions of }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  have the pronoun }{\b\lang1033 ell\'eb}{\lang1033  and the ending -}{\b\lang1033 ll\'eb}{\lang1033 
 instead. Some think this has another meaning, perhaps plural "you" instead of singular "thou", but I tend to believe that Tolkien simply revised the form of the pronoun without altering the sense.) It is evident f
rom these examples that emphatic pronouns can be derived from the corresponding pronominal endings by adding the ending to some vowel. But what vowel? We have an }{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033 - in }{\b\ul\lang1033 e}{\b\lang1033 ly\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "you", but an }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 - in }{\b\ul\lang1033 i}{\b\lang1033 ny\'eb}{\lang1033  "I". This emphatic word for "I" may be exceptional in preferring }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 
- as its initial vowel. The student may remember that the ending for "my", -}{\b\lang1033 nya}{\lang1033 , seems to prefer -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 - as its connecting vowel where one is required (as in }{\b\lang1033 atar}{\b\ul\lang1033 i}{
\b\lang1033 nya}{\lang1033  "my father", LR:61). The close association of these First Person pronominal forms with the vowel }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  seems to reflect the stem-vowel of the most basic stem }{\i\lang1033 NI}{\lang1033 
 "I", listed in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 . We may tentatively conclude that the other emphatic pronouns show the initial vowel }{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033 -, as in }{\b\lang1033 ely\'eb}{\lang1033 
. This is supported by Tolkien's Quenya version of the Lord's Prayer, where he used }{\b\lang1033 emm\'eb}{\lang1033  as the emphatic pronoun corresponding to the pronominal ending -}{\b\lang1033 mm\'eb}{\lang1033 
 for exclusive "we". It occurs in his translation of the line "and forgive us our trespasses as }{\ul\lang1033 we}{\lang1033  forgive those who trespass against us". Here, the prono
un is emphatic to draw special attention to it (stressing the parallelism: "we" want God to forgive us just like }{\i\lang1033 we}{\lang1033 
 in turn forgive others). It feels natural to let this pronoun be emphatic in English as well, though this is indicated merely by putting ext
ra stress on it, and the distinction is not represented in writing (unless one uses italics!) The Quenya system of using distinct emphatic pronouns is undeniably more elegant.
\par \tab While }{\b\lang1033 iny\'eb}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ely\'eb}{\lang1033  (changed from }{\b\lang1033 ell\'eb}{\lang1033 ) and }{\b\lang1033 emm\'eb}{\lang1033  are all the emphatic pronouns occ
urring in published and soon-to-be-published material, we can confidently extrapolate at least some more forms. The }{\i\lang1033 exclusive}{\lang1033  emphatic pronoun for "we", }{\b\lang1033 emm\'eb}{\lang1033 , would obviously correspond to the }{
\i\lang1033 inclusive}{\lang1033  variant }{\b\lang1033 elm\'eb}{\lang1033  (just like the exclusive ending for "we", -}{\b\lang1033 mm\'eb}{\lang1033 , corresponds to the inclusive ending -}{\b\lang1033 lm\'eb}{\lang1033 ). Possibly the ending -}{
\b\lang1033 nt\'eb}{\lang1033  for "they" would correspond to an independent word }{\b\lang1033 ent\'eb}{\lang1033 .
\par \tab Other forms are somewhat less certain. The ending for dual inclusive "we" is uncertain, but if it is -}{\b\lang1033 lw\'eb}{\lang1033 , we would expect }{\b\lang1033 elw\'eb}{\lang1033  as the independent emphatic pronoun. The form }{\b\lang1033 ely
\'eb}{\lang1033  can function as a singular "you", as is evident from Tolkien's translation "even thou" in his LotR rendering of }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 . As I have suggested earlier, the "L" forms of the Second Person may seem to in
dicate either a }{\i\lang1033 polite singular}{\lang1033  "you" or a }{\i\lang1033 plural}{\lang1033  "you"; perhaps }{\b\lang1033 ely\'eb}{\lang1033 
 could assume the latter sense as well. The "T" forms of the Second Person, exemplified by the object pronoun }{\b\lang1033 tye}{\lang1033  and the ending -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  that may be used in the imperative, seem to denote an }{\i\lang1033 i
ntimate}{\lang1033  and usually }{\i\lang1033 singular}{\lang1033  "you", but it is uncertain what the emphatic form would be. It depends on how we reconstruct the longer form of the ending -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 . If it is -}{\b\lang1033 ty\'eb}{
\lang1033 , the emphatic pronoun would most likely be }{\b\lang1033 ety\'eb}{\lang1033 . But I have also given some reasons for believing that Tolkien meant -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  to represent an older -}{\i\lang1033 k}{\lang1033 
, in which case the longer variant of the ending might well be -}{\b\lang1033 cc\'eb}{\lang1033  \endash  and then emphatic pronoun would probably be }{\b\lang1033 ecc\'eb}{\lang1033 .
\par \tab Things are also rather obscure in the Third Person. It is clear that the emphatic pronouns are derived from the }{\i\lang1033 long}{\lang1033  forms of the pronominal endings. The word }{\b\lang1033 i}{\b\ul\lang1033 ny\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "I" corresponds to the long subject ending -}{\b\lang1033 ny\'eb}{\lang1033 , not its shorter (and more common) form -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 ; likewise, }{\b\lang1033 e}{\b\ul\lang1033 ly\'eb}{\lang1033  "thou" corresponds to the long ending -}{
\b\lang1033 ly\'eb}{\lang1033 , though this ending may also appear in the shorter form -}{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 . There are hardly any short emphatic pronouns **}{\b\lang1033 in}{\lang1033 , **}{\b\lang1033 el}{\lang1033 
 to go with the short endings. Our problem is that in the Third Person, the }{\i\lang1033 short}{\lang1033  ending -}{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  is the only form attested in 
material Tolkien certainly intended to be LotR-compatible. We have earlier theorized that -}{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  }{\i\lang1033 may}{\lang1033  correspond to a longer ending -}{\b\lang1033 ry\'eb}{\lang1033  (for earlier -}{\b\lang1033 sy\'eb}{
\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 zy\'eb}{\lang1033 ); it would then have the same relationship to the ending -}{\b\lang1033 rya}{\lang1033  "his, her" as the ending -}{\b\lang1033 ly\'eb}{\lang1033  "you" has to the ending -}{\b\lang1033 lya}{\lang1033 
 "your". If such an ending -}{\b\lang1033 ry\'eb}{\lang1033  exists, it could correspond to an emphatic pronoun ?}{\b\lang1033 ery\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "(even) he/she". But when we start extrapolating from extrapolations, the risk of losing contact with Tolkien's actual intentions obviously becomes acute.
\par 
\par We know a few more things about the emphatic pronouns, though. They can receive case endings; in Tolkien's Quenya rendering of the Lord's Prayer, the emphatic pronoun }{\b\lang1033 emm\'eb}{\lang1033  "we" once occurs with the dative ending -}{
\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  attached: }{\b\lang1033 Emmen}{\lang1033 . (This also confirms that pronouns take the simplest case endings, that is, the ones used with singular nouns \endash 
 even if the pronoun is plural by its meaning: "We" must refer to several persons, but the simplest dative ending -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  is used instead of the plural form -}{\b\lang1033 in}{\lang1033 .) As 
pointed out in the previous lesson, the 1st person dative form }{\b\lang1033 nin}{\lang1033  "to me, for me" is particularly well attested, but if one wants to say "for }{\i\lang1033 me}{\lang1033  myself", "for }{\i\lang1033 me}{\lang1033 
 [and no one else]", it would be better to start from the emphatic form }{\b\lang1033 iny\'eb}{\lang1033  and derive the dative form }{\b\lang1033 inyen}{\lang1033 .
\par \tab We have already cited the final lines of }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 , where part of one sentence is repeated with special emphasis on the pronoun: }{\b\lang1033 Nai hiruvaly\'eb Valimar! Nai }{\b\ul\lang1033 ely\'eb}{\b\lang1033  hiruva!}
{\lang1033  From this example it appears that if a pronominal ending is replaced by an independent pronoun, the ending is removed from the verb (not }{\b\lang1033 nai ely\'eb hiruvaly\'eb}{\lang1033 
 with both an independent pronoun and the corresponding ending still attached to the verb). Yet in the draft version, when the pronoun }{\b\lang1033 ely\'eb}{\lang1033  was still }{\b\lang1033 ell\'eb}{\lang1033 , Tolkien did use precisely that system: }{
\b\lang1033 Nai ell\'eb hiruvall\'eb}{\lang1033 . He apparently decided that this version was somewhat over-complete, and writers should probably avoid this system.
\par \tab Yet the verb following an emphatic pronoun should perhaps receive at least the plural ending -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  if the pronoun is plural. If we want to transform (say) }{\b\lang1033 hiruvamm\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "we shall find" into two words to put special emphasis on the pronoun "we", I guess the resulting phrase would be }{\b\lang1033 emm\'eb hiruva}{\b\ul\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 , not **}{\b\lang1033 emm\'eb hiruva}{\lang1033 . If the pronoun }{\b\lang1033 ely
\'eb}{\lang1033  does denote both singular polite "you/thou" as well as plural "you", the following verb may then reveal in what sense it is used. In }{\b\lang1033 nai ely\'eb hiruva!}{\lang1033  the pronoun must be singular ("thou") since there is no -}{
\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  attached to the verb. Perhaps }{\b\lang1033 nai ely\'eb hiruva}{\b\ul\lang1033 r}{\b\lang1033 !}{\lang1033 
 would also be a possible sentence, but here it would be clear that a plural "you" is intended. If this is so, Frodo could after all be certain that Galadriel addressed }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 
 to him alone ("thou"), not to the entire Fellowship ("you") \endash  though the pronoun }{\b\lang1033 ely\'eb}{\lang1033  as such is perhaps ambiguous in this regard.
\par 
\par As pointed out above, the emphatic pronouns can receive case endings, as can the shorter independent pronouns discussed in the previous lesson. It is, however, somewhat uncertain whether the endings for
 genitive and possessive should be added to such independent pronouns. Obviously, some kind of independent words for (say) "mine" or "yours" would be required to have a fully functional language. The ending -}{\b\lang1033 lya}{\lang1033 
 can be used to express "your", as in }{\b\lang1033 parmalya}{\lang1033  "your book", but how do we say "the book is yours"? Published examples of Quenya provide no clues.
\par \tab It has long been theorized that not only the subject endings that may be suffixed to verbs, but also the possessive endings that may be added to nouns (like -}{\b\lang1033 nya}{\lang1033  "my" or -}{\b\lang1033 lya}{\lang1033 
 "your"), have corresponding emphatic forms. This has never been explicitly confirmed. However, given the fact that the ending -}{\b\lang1033 ly\'eb}{\lang1033  "you, thou" corresponds to an independent form }{\b\lang1033 ely\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "you" (emphatic), it certainly seems plausible to assume that the ending -}{\b\lang1033 lya}{\lang1033  "your" could correspond to an independent form }{\b\lang1033 elya}{\lang1033  "yours". This word could then be used in a sentence like }{\b\lang1033 
i parma n\'e1 elya}{\lang1033 , "the book is yours". But it could also be used for special emphasis, so that while }{\b\lang1033 parmalya}{\lang1033  means simply "your book", }{\b\lang1033 elya parma}{\lang1033  would mean "}{\i\lang1033 your}{\lang1033 
 [and no one else's] book".
\par \tab If the theory holds, other emphatic possessive pronouns would be }{\b\lang1033 erya}{\lang1033  "his, her", }{\b\lang1033 elma}{\lang1033  "our" [inclusive]" and }{\b\lang1033 emma}{\lang1033  "our [exclusive]" \endash 
 of course corresponding to the endings -}{\b\lang1033 rya}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 lma}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 mma}{\lang1033 . The attested word }{\b\lang1033 elya}{\lang1033 
 for "your, thy" would be either a plural "your" or a polite singular "your" (or "thy"); the intimate singular "your" could be something like }{\b\lang1033 ecca}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 etya}{\lang1033 . If the ending for dual inclusive "our" is -}{
\b\lang1033 lwa}{\lang1033 , we could have }{\b\lang1033 elwa}{\lang1033  as the corresponding emphatic pronoun. An even bigger "if" relates to the emphatic word for "their", since it must be extrapolated in two steps: }{\i\lang1033 Assuming that}{
\lang1033  the ending -}{\b\lang1033 nt\'eb}{\lang1033  for "they" corresponds to an unattested ending -}{\b\lang1033 nta}{\lang1033  "their", we may }{\i\lang1033 assume}{\lang1033  that it thi
s ending in turn corresponds to an emphatic possessive pronoun }{\b\lang1033 enta}{\lang1033 . As for the independent form of the possessive pronoun "my", corresponding to the ending -}{\b\lang1033 nya}{\lang1033 , we would probably expect the form }{
\b\lang1033 inya}{\lang1033  (since the subject ending -}{\b\lang1033 ny\'eb}{\lang1033  corresponds to an independent form }{\b\lang1033 iny\'eb}{\lang1033 ).
\par \tab These extrapolations are not entirely unproblematic. Some of these forms actually occur in Tolkien's published writings, but with quite different meanings. }{\b\lang1033 Inya}{\lang1033 , for instance, is mentioned in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{
\lang1033  \endash  but there it is not an emphatic word for "my", it as an adjective "female", of a quite different derivation (see the entry }{\i\lang1033 INI}{\lang1033 ). }{\b\lang1033 Erya}{\lang1033 
, which we have suggested as an emphatic word for "his" or "her" (corresponding to the ending -}{\b\lang1033 rya}{\lang1033 ), would coincide in form with the adjective }{\b\lang1033 erya}{\lang1033  "single, sole" (Etym, entry }{\i\lang1033 ERE}{
\lang1033 ). The student may already have noticed that }{\b\lang1033 enta}{\lang1033  as an emphatic word for "their" would clash with the demonstrative "that, yonder" (Etym, entry }{\i\lang1033 EN}{\lang1033 ). Since demonstratives may seem to }{
\i\lang1033 follow}{\lang1033  the noun they connect with (cf. UT:305: }{\b\lang1033 vanda }{\b\ul\lang1033 sina}{\lang1033  = "}{\ul\lang1033 this}{\lang1033  oath"), we could perhaps distinguish }{\b\lang1033 coa }{\b\ul\lang1033 enta}{\lang1033  "}{
\ul\lang1033 yonder}{\lang1033  house" from }{\b\ul\lang1033 enta}{\b\lang1033  coa}{\lang1033  "}{\i\ul\lang1033 their}{\lang1033  house". As for our extrapolated forms }{\b\lang1033 inya}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 erya}{\lang1033 
 coinciding with Tolkien-made adjectives of quite different meaning, what can I say? Some, no doub
t, would feel that this throws considerable doubt on this whole business of extrapolating emphatic possessive pronouns to go with the attested subject pronouns. Actually I think these extrapolations are about as plausible as any forms not directly atteste
d
 can be. Given the fluid state of the Quenya language in general and its pronouns in particular, different stages of Tolkien's ever-changing conception are quite likely to involve coinciding word-forms of different meaning. However, in the exercises below
, I focus on the better-attested }{\i\lang1033 subject}{\lang1033  pronouns, like }{\b\lang1033 iny\'eb}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 ely\'eb}{\lang1033 .
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 QUESTION-WORDS}{\i\cf2\lang3081 
\par }{\lang1033 Many English words frequently used in }{\i\lang1033 questions}{\lang1033  show an initial }{\i\lang1033 wh}{\lang1033 -: "who?", "what?", "where?", "which?", "whose?", "why?" etc. In Tolkien's Elvish, an initial }{\b\lang1033 ma}{\lang1033 
- has similar connotations; he referred to the "Eldarin interrogative element }{\i\lang1033 ma}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 man}{\lang1033 " (PM:357). This "element" Tolkien seems to have borrowed from Semitic languages; cf. for instance Hebrew }{
\i\lang1033 ma}{\lang1033  = "what?"
\par \tab We have nothing like a complete list of Elvish interrogative words, but some of them do occur in published material. Best attested is the word for "who", }{\b\lang1033 man}{\lang1033 , which occurs in a question in the middle of }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1
ri\'eb}{\lang1033 : }{\b\lang1033 S\'ed }{\b\ul\lang1033 man}{\b\lang1033  i yulma nin enquantuva?}{\lang1033  "Now }{\ul\lang1033 who}{\lang1033  will refill the cup for me?" }{\b\lang1033 Man}{\lang1033  = "who" occurs repeatedly in the }{\i\lang1033 
Markirya}{\lang1033  poem, e.g. in the question }{\b\lang1033 man tiruva f\'e1na cirya[?]}{\lang1033  "Who will heed [/watch] a white ship?" (In one out of five occurrences, }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{\lang1033  as printed in MC:221-222 has }{\b\lang1033 men
}{\lang1033  instead, but this must be a misreading of Tolkien's manuscript; there seems to be no grammatical variation that could explain the variant form.) Perhaps }{\b\lang1033 man}{\lang1033 
 can receive case endings, so that we can have (say) the genitive form }{\b\lang1033 mano}{\lang1033  = "whose?"
\par \tab If }{\b\lang1033 man}{\lang1033  is "who" (referring to people), what is the word for "what" (referring to things)? In LR:58, Tolkien apparently lets }{\b\lang1033 man}{\lang1033  cover "what?" as well: }{\b\lang1033 Man-i\'eb?}{\lang1033 
 is translated "what is it?" This is hardly LotR-style Quenya; the ending -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033  = "is" was almost certainly abandoned later. }{\i\lang1033 F\'edriel's Song}{\lang1033  also uses }{\b\lang1033 man}{\lang1033 
 in the sense of "what": }{\b\lang1033 Man...ant\'e1va nin Il\'favatar[?]}{\lang1033  = "What will the Father [Il\'favatar, God] give me?" Whether Tolkien at one point intended }{\b\lang1033 man}{\lang1033 
 to mean both "who" and "what", or whether he simply changed his mind back and forth regarding the precise meaning of }{\b\lang1033 man}{\lang1033 , cannot be determined now. Turning to a post-LotR source, we find the question }{\b\lang1033 mana i}{\b 
\'b7}{\b\lang1033 coimas Eldaron[?]}{\lang1033 , which is translated "what is the }{\i\lang1033 coimas}{\lang1033  ["life-bread" = Sindarin }{\i\lang1033 lembas}{\lang1033 
] of the Eldar?" (PM:395; a variant reading occurs in PM:403). How are we to interpret this word }{\b\lang1033 mana}{\lang1033 , that would seem to correspond to "what is" in the translation? It could be a word }{\b\lang1033 ma}{\lang1033 
 "what" (which would be a direct borrowing from Hebrew!) + the copula }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033  "is", here directly suffixed and shortened to -}{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033 . However, the form }{\b\lang1033 ma}{\lang1033  is known to have at least tw
o different meanings in Quenya (see the next lesson), so I tend to doubt that Tolkien intended it to mean "what?" as well. Rather }{\b\lang1033 mana}{\lang1033  is simply a word for "what", and there is no explicit copula "is" in the sentence }{
\b\lang1033 mana i}{\b \'b7}{\b\lang1033 coimas[?]}{\lang1033   = "what [is] the life-bread?" It may be that }{\b\lang1033 mana}{\lang1033 
 "what" can receive case-endings. Published material provides no word for "why?", but by one suggestion we can work around this gap by adding the dative ending -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  to }{\b\lang1033 mana}{\lang1033  \endash  the resulting form }{
\b\lang1033 manan}{\lang1033  meaning literally "what for?"
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 By its form, }{\b\lang1033 mana}{\lang1033  resembles the demonstratives }{\b\lang1033 sina}{\lang1033  "this", }{\b\lang1033 tana}{\lang1033  "that" and }{\b\lang1033 yana}{\lang1033 
 "that (yonder)". Since }{\b\lang1033 vanda sina}{\lang1033  means "this oath" (UT:305, 317), perhaps }{\b\lang1033 vanda mana?}{\lang1033  would mean "what oath?" or "which oath?" }{\b\lang1033 Mana vanda?}{\lang1033  would rather mean "what [is] an oat
h?", given Tolkien's example }{\b\lang1033 mana i}{\b \'b7}{\b\lang1033 coimas[?]}{\lang1033  = "what [is] the life-bread?"
\par The same late document that provides this example also includes a word for "how?", appearing as part of the question }{\b\ul\lang1033 manen}{\b\lang1033  lamb\'eb Quendion ahyan\'eb[?]}{\lang1033  = "}{\ul\lang1033 How}{\lang1033 
 did the language of Elves change?" (PM:395). Interestingly, this word }{\b\lang1033 manen}{\lang1033  "how?" seems to include the instrumental ending -}{\b\lang1033 nen}{\lang1033 , added to the "interrogative element" }{\b\lang1033 ma}{\lang1033 
- (PM:347). }{\b\lang1033 Manen}{\lang1033  could mean, literally, "what by?" (it may even be a contraction of }{\b\lang1033 mananen}{\lang1033  for all we know). I
t seems highly plausible that other case endings than that of the instrumental can be added to }{\b\lang1033 ma}{\lang1033 -. Perhaps we can have locative }{\b\lang1033 mass\'eb?}{\lang1033  "where?", ablative }{\b\lang1033 mallo}{\lang1033 
 "whence?/where from?" and }{\b\lang1033 manna}{\lang1033  "whither/where to?", filling further gaps in our vocabulary. However, the exercises below only involve the attested forms }{\b\lang1033 man}{\lang1033  "who?", }{\b\lang1033 mana}{\lang1033 
 "what?" and }{\b\lang1033 manen}{\lang1033  "how?"
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 POSTPOSITIONS}{\lang1033 
\par We have introduced various }{\i\lang1033 prepositions}{\lang1033 , such as }{\b\lang1033 nu}{\lang1033  "under", }{\b\lang1033 or}{\lang1033  "over" or }{\b\lang1033 ve}{\lang1033 
 "as, like". Prepositions are so called because they are typically "positioned" before (}{\i\lang1033 pre}{\lang1033 ) the word(s) they connect with. In Quenya and English alike, one would say }{\b\lang1033 nu alda}{\lang1033  "under a tree" \endash 
 not **}{\b\lang1033 alda nu}{\lang1033  "a tree under". (Of course, the word order may be quite garbled in poetry, as when the LotR version of }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  has }{\b\lang1033 Vardo tellumar nu luini}{\lang1033 
 "Varda's domes under blue" for "under Varda's blue domes". Here, we are rather discussing the normal, non-poetic word order.)
\par \tab There are also }{\i\lang1033 postpositions}{\lang1033 , similar in function to the prepositions, but coming after (}{\i\lang1033 post}{\lang1033 ) the word or words they connect with. In English, the word }{\i\lang1033 ago}{\lang1033 
 may be seen as a postposition, since it comes at the end of phrases like "three years ago". Some languages would use a preposit
ion instead, expressing this meaning something like "before three years". Interestingly, a word simply glossed "ago" is mentioned in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 : }{\b\lang1033 Y\'e1}{\lang1033 
. It is not mentioned or exemplified elsewhere, and since its English gloss is all we have to go on, we may assume that }{\b\lang1033 y\'e1}{\lang1033  is a postposition in Quenya as well. If so, "three years ago" could be translated directly as }{
\b\lang1033 neld\'eb loar y\'e1}{\lang1033 .
\par \tab At an older stage, Elvish apparently had many postpositions. Tolkien stated that at the oldest stage, "prepositional" elements were normally "attached" \endash  apparently meaning }{\i\lang1033 suffixed}{\lang1033  \endash 
 to noun stems (WJ:368). Many of the Quenya case endings Tolkien clearly meant to represent originally independent elements that had merged into the noun they followed. For instance, the ending -}{\b\lang1033 nna}{\lang1033  f
or allative is obviously related to the preposition }{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 ana}{\lang1033 
, likewise meaning "to, towards". Yet Quenya had at least a few postpositions that had not evolved into case endings, but still appeared as independent words. Whereas }{\b\lang1033 y\'e1}{\lang1033  discussed above is only a
ttested as an isolated word mentioned in Etym, the word }{\b\lang1033 pella}{\lang1033  "beyond" appears in actual Quenya texts, and it does seem to be a postposition. }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  has }{\b\lang1033 And\'fan\'eb }{
\b\ul\lang1033 pella}{\lang1033  for "}{\ul\lang1033 beyond}{\lang1033  the West", and this is apparently not just another example of a poetic word order, for Tolkien did not alter this phrase in his prose version of the song. (The word }{\b\lang1033 And
\'fan\'eb}{\lang1033  "West" is an alternative to the more usual word }{\b\lang1033 N\'famen}{\lang1033 . }{\b\lang1033 And\'fan\'eb}{\lang1033  may also be defined as "sunset" or even "evening".) }{\b\lang1033 Pella}{\lang1033 
 is used as a postposition in the }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{\lang1033  poem as well, where it connects with a noun inflected for plural ablative: }{\b\lang1033 Elenillor pella}{\lang1033 
 is translated "from beyond the stars" (literally "from stars beyond").
\par \tab Whether }{\b\lang1033 pella}{\lang1033  could also be used as a preposition, just like its English gloss "beyond", is impossible to say. Another word for "beyond", the }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033 
 that is also used in comparison, does seem to be a preposition (and perhaps the final syllable of }{\b\lang1033 pel}{\b\ul\lang1033 la}{\lang1033  is meant to be related to this }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033 ). Even so, I would use }{\b\lang1033 pella}{
\lang1033  as a postposition only, employing the word order observed in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{\lang1033  alike. 
\par 
\par }{\i\cf2\lang3081 Summary of Lesson Nineteen:}{\lang3081  Imperative phrases may in various ways include pronouns. If an order has one single addressee, the ending -}{\b\lang3081 t}{\lang3081 
 (basically meaning "thou") may be added to the verb of the imperative phrase; if several people are asked to do something, the ending -}{\b\lang3081 l}{\lang3081 
 (basically meaning "you", plural) may be used instead. Pronouns denoting the direct or indirect object of the imperative may glue themselves to the imperative particle }{\b\lang3081 \'e1}{\lang3081 . \endash  The (long 
forms of the) pronominal subject endings that may be suffixed to verbs may also be used to derive independent }{\i\lang3081 emphatic pronouns}{\lang3081  by adding the relevant ending to }{\b\lang3081 e}{\lang3081 -. For instance, the subject endings -}{
\b\lang3081 ly\'eb}{\lang3081  "you, thou" and -}{\b\lang3081 mm\'eb}{\lang3081  "we" correspond to the independent emphatic pronouns }{\b\lang3081 ely\'eb}{\lang3081  "(even) thou" and }{\b\lang3081 emm\'eb}{\lang3081 
 "(even) we". The emphatic word for "I", corresponding to the ending -}{\b\lang3081 ny\'eb}{\lang3081 , however shows }{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 - rather than }{\b\lang3081 e}{\lang3081 - as its initial vowel: }{\b\lang3081 iny\'eb}{\lang3081 . \endash 
 Quenya }{\i\lang3081 interrogative }{\lang3081 words apparently show an initial }{\b\lang3081 ma}{\lang3081 -; attested examples are }{\b\lang3081 man}{\lang3081  "who", }{\b\lang3081 mana}{\lang3081  "what" and }{\b\lang3081 manen}{\lang3081  "how". 
\endash  }{\i\lang3081 Postpositions}{\lang3081  are similar in function to prepositions, but follow rather than precede the word(s) they connect with. The word }{\b\lang3081 pella}{\lang3081  "beyond" seems to function as a postposition; }{\i\lang3081 
Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081  has }{\b\lang3081 And\'fan\'eb pella}{\lang3081  (not ?}{\b\lang3081 pella And\'fan\'eb}{\lang3081 ) for "beyond the West". The word }{\b\lang3081 y\'e1}{\lang3081  is glossed "ago" (Etym, entry }{\i\lang3081 YA}{\lang3081 
), so perhaps it functions as a postposition just like its English gloss.
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 VOCABULARY}{\lang3081 
\par 
\par }{\b\lang3081 ots\'eba}{\lang3081  "seventh"
\par }{\b\lang3081 tolt\'eba}{\lang3081  "eighth" }{\fs20\lang3081 (In a late document Tolkien actually changed this form to }{\b\fs20\lang3081 told\'eba}{\fs20\lang3081 : VT42:25, 31. Apparently he considered changing the word for "8" from }{\b\fs20\lang3081 
tolto}{\fs20\lang3081  to }{\b\fs20\lang3081 toldo}{\fs20\lang3081 . We may accept }{\b\fs20\lang3081 toldo}{\fs20\lang3081  "8" and }{\b\fs20\lang3081 told\'eba}{\fs20\lang3081  "8th" as valid variants, but in the exercises below I prefer }{
\b\fs20\lang3081 tolt\'eba}{\fs20\lang3081   \endash  to go with }{\b\fs20\lang3081 tolto}{\fs20\lang3081 , the form of the word "8" as listed in the }{\i\fs20\lang3081 Etymologies}{\fs20\lang3081 .)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 iny\'eb}{\lang3081  "I" (emphatic pronoun)
\par }{\b\lang3081 ely\'eb}{\lang3081  "you, thou" (emphatic pronoun)
\par }{\b\lang3081 emm\'eb}{\lang3081  "we", exclusive (emphatic pronoun)
\par }{\b\lang3081 elm\'eb}{\lang3081  "we", inclusive (emphatic pronoun). }{\fs20\lang3081 (This form is not directly attested, but since it forms the logical counterpart of }{\b\fs20\lang3081 emm\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 , this extrapolation from the ending -}{
\b\fs20\lang3081 lm\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  seems so plausible that I will use it in the exercises below.)}{\i\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 man}{\lang3081  "who?"
\par }{\b\lang3081 mana}{\lang3081  "what?" }{\fs20\lang3081 (according to one interpretation of the sentence where this word occurs)
\par }{\b\lang3081 manen}{\lang3081  "how?"
\par }{\b\lang3081 pella}{\lang3081  "beyond" (postposition)
\par }{\b\lang3081 y\'e1}{\lang3081  "ago" (postposition like its English gloss?)
\par }{\b\lang3081 \'edr\'eb}{\lang3081  "when"
\par 
\par }{\fs20\lang3081 NOTE on the word }{\b\fs20\lang3081 \'edr\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  "when": This is (almost certainly) not an interrogative word, despite its English gloss. A question like "when will you come?" can hardly be translated **}{\b\fs20\lang3081 
\'edr\'eb tuluvaly\'eb?}{\fs20\lang3081  No Quenya word for "when?" as a genuine question-word has been published, though it may be possible to work around this gap \endash  for instance, we could use a circumlocution like }{\b\fs20\lang3081 l\'fa mana}{
\fs20\lang3081 (}{\b\fs20\lang3081 ss\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 )}{\b\fs20\lang3081 ?}{\fs20\lang3081  = "(at) what time?" The word }{\b\fs20\lang3081 \'edr\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  is used for "when" in the sense that it }{\i\fs20\lang3081 
introduces information about when something occurs}{\fs20\lang3081 ; it is attested in F\'edriel's Song. The relevant phrases are not quite LotR-style Quenya, but the use of }{\b\fs20\lang3081 \'edr\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  may be noted all the same: }{
\b\fs20\lang3081 Y\'e9va tyel ar i-narquelion, }{\b\fs20\ul\lang3081 ir\'eb}{\b\fs20\lang3081  ilqua y\'e9va n\'f3tina}{\fs20\lang3081  = "there will be an end and the Fading, }{\fs20\ul\lang3081 when}{\fs20\lang3081  all is counted"; }{\b\fs20\lang3081 
man...ant\'e1va nin Il\'favatar...}{\b\fs20\ul\lang3081 \'edr\'eb}{\b\fs20\lang3081  Anarinya queluva?}{\fs20\lang3081  = "what will the Father give me...}{\fs20\ul\lang3081 when}{\fs20\lang3081 
 my Sun faileth?" At present we have no later attestation of such a word, and since it is highly useful, we may well adopt }{\b\fs20\lang3081 \'edr\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 
 "when" into our attempted Unified or Standard Quenya. Many post-Tolkien writers have used it already. It has been suggested that the initial }{\b\fs20\lang3081 \'ed}{\fs20\lang3081 - of }{\b\fs20\lang3081 \'edr\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 
 is related to the definite article }{\b\fs20\lang3081 i}{\fs20\lang3081  "the", whereas the final -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 r\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  can be equated with the word }{\b\fs20\lang3081 r\'e9}{\fs20\lang3081  "[24-hour] day" (the word }{
\b\fs20\lang3081 aur\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  refers to the daylight period only). If so, }{\b\fs20\lang3081 \'edr\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  basically means "the day" \endash  and of course, "what will the Father give me...}{\fs20\ul\lang3081 the day}{
\fs20\lang3081  my Sun faileth" would still make sense. However, it may seem that the word }{\b\fs20\lang3081 \'edr\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  "when" existed long before the word }{\b\fs20\lang3081 r\'e9}{\fs20\lang3081 
 "day"; the latter apparently emerged as Tolkien was writing the LotR Appendices. I wouldn't hesitate to use }{\b\fs20\lang3081 \'edr\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  for "when" in general (not limiting its application to "the day when...")}{\lang3081 
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 EXERCISES
\par }{\lang3081 As described above, Tolkien sometimes added extra words when translating emphatic pronouns, e.g. }{\b\lang3081 ely\'eb}{\lang3081  = "}{\ul\lang3081 even}{\lang3081 
 thou" (to bring out the emphatic quality of the word). However, in the keys to the exercises below, as well as in the "Translate into Quenya" section, we have adopted the simpler system of }{\i\lang3081 italicizing}{\lang3081  emphatic pronouns (e.g. }{
\b\lang3081 ely\'eb}{\lang3081  = }{\i\lang3081 you}{\lang3081 ; by the way, we will use this translation rather than "}{\i\lang3081 thou}{\lang3081 " since the "L"-form pronouns may seem to be ambiguous as to number, just like English "you").
\par 
\par 1. Translate into English:
\par 
\par }{\i\lang3081 A.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Man marn\'eb i coass\'eb cainen loar y\'e1, \'edr\'eb iny\'eb l\'e1 marn\'eb tass\'eb?}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 B.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Mana elm\'eb polir car\'eb?
\par }{\i\lang3081 C}{\lang3081 . }{\b\lang3081 \'c1ta antat nin, ar \'e1vata nurtat nillo!}{\b\i\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 D.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Man ely\'eb cenn\'eb i ots\'eba auress\'eb?}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 E.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Antuvant\'eb ily\'eb i annar inyen ar l\'e1 elyen!}{\i\lang3081 
\par F.}{\b\lang3081  Mana i neri hirner i n\'f3ress\'eb i oronti pella?}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 G.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Manen ely\'eb poluva orta i alta ondo \'edr\'eb iny\'eb \'fam\'eb pol\'eb caritas?}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 H.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Sellemma mar\'eb coa yanass\'eb; emm\'eb marir i tolt\'eba coass\'eb mall\'eb sinass\'eb. \'c1 tulil ar \'e1 cenil coamma!
\par }{\lang3081 
\par 2. Translate into Quenya:
\par 
\par }{\i\lang3081 I.}{\lang3081  Who has done that [}{\b\lang3081 ta}{\lang3081 ]?
\par }{\i\lang3081 J.}{\lang3081  What did }{\i\lang3081 you}{\lang3081  find in the seventh room when you went there [or, "thither" = }{\b\lang3081 tanna}{\lang3081 ]?
\par }{\i\lang3081 K.}{\lang3081  When }{\i\lang3081 you}{\lang3081  have come, }{\i\lang3081 I}{\lang3081  want to leave [}{\b\lang3081 auta}{\lang3081 ].
\par }{\i\lang3081 L.}{\lang3081  Give us the wine! }{\i\lang3081 (an order explicitly addressed to several persons)}{\lang3081 .
\par }{\i\lang3081 M.}{\lang3081  Give the wine to }{\i\lang3081 us}{\lang3081  and not [}{\b\lang3081 l\'e1}{\lang3081 ] to the warriors! }{\i\lang3081 ("Us" is exclusive here. "To" = dative, not allative. This order is explicitly addressed to }{\lang3081 one
}{\i\lang3081  person only.)}{\fs20\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 N}{\lang3081 . The seventh warrior has come from beyond the great mountains.
\par }{\i\lang3081 O}{\lang3081 . Beyond [or, behind] the eighth door [or, "gate", }{\b\lang3081 ando}{\lang3081 ] }{\i\lang3081 you}{\lang3081  found a great treasure; }{\i\lang3081 we}{\lang3081  [exclusive] who came after you [}{\b\lang3081 apa le}{
\lang3081 ] did not find a thing!
\par }{\i\lang3081 P}{\lang3081 . How did the evil Dwarves find them seven days ago?
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs36\cf6\lang3081 LESSON TWENTY}{\b\fs32\lang3081 
\par The obscure verb "to be". }{\b\i\fs32\lang3081 Ma}{\b\fs32\lang3081  as a possible interrogative particle.
\par }{\b\i\fs32\lang3081 Sa}{\b\fs32\lang3081  introducing nominal clauses. }{\lang3081 
\par 
\par We are now fast exhausting the reasonably certain
 "facts" about Quenya (though as I have tried to make clear, even many of the "facts" must be considered tentative deductions). This last regular lesson is already moving far into the twilight zone of linguistic obscurities.
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 THE VERB "TO BE"}{\b\fs20\cf2\lang3081  
\par (including some remarks on the form }{\b\i\fs20\cf2\lang3081 \'eba}{\b\fs20\cf2\lang3081 )}{\fs20\lang1033 
\par }{\lang1033 The various forms of the verb "to be" have always been a problem. The LotR version of }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  includes the copula }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033 
 "is". A draft version of the same poem combines the copula with a plural subject, resulting in the form }{\b\lang1033 nar}{\lang1033  "are". In July 2001, the future-tense form }{\b\lang1033 nauva}{\lang1033  "will be" finally turned up in }{\i\lang1033 
Vinyar Tengwar}{\lang1033  42 p. 34. We have mentioned and practiced all of these forms before.
\par \tab Several tense-forms, as well
 as the infinitive, are missing. To start with the infinitive, what is "to be" in Quenya? We have no other clue than the apparent fact the infinitive of A-stem verbs is identical to the verbal stem itself, with no additions. In Etym, }{\i\lang1033 N\'c2}{
\lang1033  is listed as the "stem of [the] verb 'to be' in Q[uenya]". So }{\i\lang1033 conceivably}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033  may also function as an infinitive: "I want to be an Elf" = ?}{\b\lang1033 Merin n\'e1 Elda}{\lang1033 
. But of course, Tolkien may have imagined something entirely different.
\par \tab Can }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 nauva}{\lang1033  and other tense-forms be combined with the normal pronominal endings? For decades, this was unclear and uncertain, but in January 2002, the Tolkienian example }{\b\lang1033 naly\'eb
}{\lang1033  "thou art" was finally published in VT43:27. This example clearly incorporates the well-known ending -}{\b\lang1033 ly\'eb}{\lang1033  "you, thou", and it also seems to tell us that the copula assumes the short form }{\b\lang1033 na}{
\lang1033 - when endings are to be added. The form }{\b\lang1033 nar}{\lang1033  "are" (used with plural subjects), rather than ?}{\b\lang1033 n\'e1r}{\lang1033 , points in the same direction.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 The published corpus may not be wholly consistent, though. In the very early (some would even say }{\i\lang1033 first}{\lang1033 ) "Qenya" poem }{\i\lang1033 Narqelion}{\lang1033 
, written in 1915 or 1916, Tolkien used the form }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1re}{\lang1033 . Since there is no straightforward Tolkien-made translation of this poem, we cannot be entirely certain what it means. Christopher Gilson, a
nalyzing the entire poem in light of the almost contemporaneous Qenya Lexicon, concluded that }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1re}{\lang1033  may mean "it is" (VT40:31). A 3rd person marker -}{\b\lang1033 re}{\lang1033  (or if you like, -}{\b\lang1033 r\'eb}{\lang1033 
) was perhaps present in Tolkien's later forms of Quenya as well, though at the later stages we might expect it to mean "she" rather than "it" \endash  see Lesson 15. 
\par However, it seems better to extrapolate from the post-LotR example }{\b\lang1033 naly\'eb}{\lang1033 . If so, the following pattern might emerge:
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 nan}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 nany\'eb}{\lang1033  "I am"
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 nat}{\lang1033  "you [intimate singular] are", perhaps also with a longer form (}{\b\lang1033 nacc\'eb}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 naty\'eb}{\lang1033 ???)
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 nal}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 naly\'eb}{\lang1033  "you [polite] are"
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 nas}{\lang1033  "he/she/it is", conceivably with a longer form ?}{\b\lang1033 nary\'eb}{\lang1033 ; there may also be gender-specific forms }{\b\lang1033 naro}{\lang1033  "he is", }{\b\lang1033 nar\'eb}{\lang1033  "she is"
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 namm\'eb}{\lang1033  "we [exclusive] are", }{\b\lang1033 nalm\'eb}{\lang1033  "we [inclusive] are", and perhaps something like }{\b\lang1033 nalw\'eb}{\lang1033  "we [dual inclusive] are"
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 nant\'eb}{\lang1033  "they are"
\par 
\par In the original version of this lesson, published before the example }{\b\lang1033 naly\'eb}{\lang1033  became available, I suggested a similar but not wholly identical system. I used the short form }{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033 
- whenever a consonant cluster was to follow, as when the endings -}{\b\lang1033 mm\'eb}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 lm\'eb}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 lw\'eb}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 nt\'eb}{\lang1033 
 are attached. I assumed that the endings with a consonant + }{\b\lang1033 y}{\lang1033  (-}{\b\lang1033 ny\'eb}{\lang1033  and -}{\b\lang1033 ly\'eb}{\lang1033 , plus the two extrapolated endings ?-}{\b\lang1033 ty\'eb}{\lang1033  and ?-}{\b\lang1033 ry
\'eb}{\lang1033 ) would }{\i\lang1033 not}{\lang1033  have the power to shorten a preceding vowel. Compare the }{\b\lang1033 \'e1}{\lang1033  of }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1}{\lang1033  "hand" remaining long before the possessive pronominal ending -}{\b\lang1033 
rya}{\lang1033  "her" in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 : }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1ryat}{\lang1033  "her hands", dual. This system would produce }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1ly\'eb}{\lang1033  rather than the now-attested form }{\b\lang1033 naly\'eb}{\lang1033 
 for "you are". I still don't think this is entirely implausible; the copula }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033  may appear in the short form }{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033  even when it stands alone (VT43:26), so variants like }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1ly\'eb}{
\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 naly\'eb}{\lang1033  could probably coexist in the same form of Quenya. When endings are to be added, I have consistently used forms with short }{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033 - in the exercises below, though.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 The future tense }{\b\lang1033 nauva}{\lang1033  "will be" would be able to receive all pronominal endings with no modifications: }{\b\lang1033 nauvan}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 nauvany\'eb}{
\lang1033  "I will be", }{\b\lang1033 nauvalm\'eb}{\lang1033  "we will be", etc.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab Perhaps the verb }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033  can even receive }{\i\lang1033 two}{\lang1033  pronominal endings, for subject and predicate, e.g. }{\b\lang1033 na}{\b\cf6\lang1033 nye}{
\b\cf2\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  = "}{\cf6\lang1033 I}{\lang1033  am }{\cf2\lang1033 he}{\lang1033 ". (Compare the Tolkien-made form }{\b\lang1033 ut\'favie}{\b\cf6\lang1033 nye}{\b\cf2\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  = "}{\cf6\lang1033 I}{\lang1033  have found }{
\cf2\lang1033 it}{\lang1033 ", the second ending denoting the object.) 
\par \tab 
\par Instead of adding pronominal endings to the copula }{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033 -, one may also simply use an independent pronoun and leave out the copula altogether: It is understood. When translating "blessed art thou" in his Quenya rendering of the }{
\i\lang1033 Hail Mary}{\lang1033 , Tolkien simply wrote }{\b\lang1033 aistana ely\'eb}{\lang1033 , sc. }{\b\lang1033 aistana}{\lang1033  "blessed" immediately followed by the pronoun }{\b\lang1033 ely\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "thou". There is no copula "art" in the Quenya text. So we can apparently feel free to build copula-less sentences like }{\b\lang1033 iny\'eb Elda}{\lang1033  "I [am] an Elf" or }{\b\lang1033 ely\'eb vanya}{\lang1033 
 "you [are] beautiful". The shorter, less emphatic pronouns would presumably work just as well: }{\b\lang1033 Ni Elda}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 le vanya}{\lang1033 , etc.
\par \tab Yet we can't always do without the verb "to be", and another problem has to do with the past tense "was". We have no certain attestations of it. Adding the normal past-tense marker -}{\b\lang1033 n\'eb}{\lang1033  to the stem }{\i\lang1033 N\'c2}{
\lang1033  would of course produce something like ?}{\b\lang1033 n\'e1n\'eb}{\lang1033 , but this awkward form seems most improbable. In all likelihood, Tolkien actually envisioned an irregular form. A form }{\b\lang1033 n\'e9}{\lang1033 
 "was" has long been rumored to occur in Tolkien's unpublished papers. The closest we have ever got to having this assumption confirmed would be Christopher Gilson's analysis of the same very early "Qenya" poem referred to above, }{\i\lang1033 Narqelion}{
\lang1033 . In }{\i\lang1033 Vinyar Tengwar}{\lang1033  #40, page 12-13, we find Gilson trying to decipher what he calls an "especially enigmatic" phrase from the poem. It incorporates the form }{\b\lang1033 n\'e9}{\lang1033 , and Gilson argues (p. 13):

\par 
\par }\pard \li708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 The preterite [= past tense] of the verb 'to be' is not given in [the] Q[enya] L[exicon], but this tense-form is listed for many verbs, and frequently identified as such. T
he Qenya preterite has a variety of formations, but one of the familiar types is seen in }{\i\lang1033 kanda}{\lang1033 - 'blaze', pret. }{\i\lang1033 kandane}{\lang1033 ... It is possible that forms like }{\i\lang1033 kanda-ne}{\lang1033 
 actually arose as a construction with the verb-stem plus a form of the verb 'to be', i.e. that a meaning like 'blazed' derived syntactically as in English phrases like 'was blazing' or 'did blaze', with an originally tenseless form of the stem }{
\i\lang1033 kanda}{\lang1033 - '(to) blaze, blazing' combined with the past tense expressed in the ending -}{\i\lang1033 ne}{\lang1033  'was'... The present tense of the verb 'to be' is given in QL as }{\i\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033 
 'it is'...and if the preterite is }{\i\lang1033 n\'e9}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 ne}{\lang1033 , there would be a parallel with certain other verbs where the present vs. preterite is marked solely by a change of -}{\i\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  to -}{
\i\lang1033 e}{\lang1033 , as in }{\i\lang1033 panta}{\lang1033 - 'open, unfold, spread', pret. }{\i\lang1033 pante}{\lang1033 , or }{\i\lang1033 sanga}{\lang1033 - 'pack tight', pret. }{\i\lang1033 sange}{\lang1033 .
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par Since it so happens that Mr. Gilson has access to virtually all of Tolkien's linguistic papers, he must know perfectly well whether a form }{\b\lang1033 n\'e9}{\lang1033  "was" occurs in the material or not. We may assume, then, that Gi
lson feels that he would be violating somebody's copyright if he were to say loud and clear that "}{\b\lang1033 n\'e9}{\lang1033  is the Qenya word for }{\i\lang1033 was}{\lang1033 " \endash 
 and so he has to pretend that he is merely deducing this word from already published material. Remembering that Tolkien must s
urely have discussed the various forms of "to be" in the vast amount of linguistic manuscripts that he left behind, and combining Gilson's article with more recent statements made by his group to the effect that they would not write something they }{
\i\lang1033 know}{\lang1033  to be wrong, we can apparently treat }{\b\lang1033 n\'e9}{\lang1033  = "was" as an as-good-as-attested word.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 However, even if such a word did exist in the early forms of "Qenya", it may of course have been abandoned in the more LotR-compatible forms of the language that emerged decades l
ater. It may be noted, though, that the past tense ending -}{\b\lang1033 n\'eb}{\lang1033  was never abandoned \endash  and if Gilson's theory that there is a connection between this ending and the verb "was" does reflect Tolkien's actual ideas, the word 
}{\b\lang1033 n\'e9}{\lang1033  "was" may have survived into LotR-style Quenya. Anyhow, writers can hardly do without a word for "was", and currently we have no better alternative than }{\b\lang1033 n\'e9}{\lang1033 
. Some writers have used it, and based on the pair }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033  "is" / }{\b\lang1033 nar}{\lang1033  "are", people have also extrapolated a form }{\b\lang1033 ner}{\lang1033  "were" to be used in c
onjunction with plural or multiple subjects.
\par Since the example }{\b\lang1033 naly\'eb}{\lang1033  demonstrates that the present-tense form of the copula can take pronominal endings, we may assume that this is equally true of the past-tense form "was". It would perhaps appear as }{\b\lang1033 ne}{
\lang1033 - before the various endings: }{\b\lang1033 neny\'eb}{\lang1033  "I was", }{\b\lang1033 nely\'eb}{\lang1033  "you were", }{\b\lang1033 nes}{\lang1033  "he/she/it was", }{\b\lang1033 nent\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "they were", etc. But rather than being combined with pronominal endings, it may well be that the copula would most often simply be omitted in the past tense as well, an independent pronoun being used instead of an ending: }{\b\lang1033 Ely\'eb vanya}{
\lang1033  = past tense "you [were] beautiful" or present tense "you [are] beautiful", according to context. (However, I suspect that the future-tense copula }{\b\lang1033 nauva}{\lang1033  "will be" would rarely be omitted like this.)
\par Five Quenya tenses are attested: Present (or continuative), aorist, past, future and perfect. The verb "to be" may not make any distinction between present and aorist (}{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033  "is" covering both); the past tense "was" may be }{
\b\lang1033 n\'e9}{\lang1033  as discussed above, and the future tense is attested as }{\b\lang1033 nauva}{\lang1033  "will be". This leaves only the perfect tense \endash 
 "has been". Normally, the perfect is formed by prefixing an augment similar to the stem-vowel, lengthening the stem-vowel in its normal place and adding the ending -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033 , e.g. }{\b\lang1033 ut\'fali\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "has come" from the stem }{\i\lang1033 TUL}{\lang1033  "come". However, it is less than clear how the stem }{\i\lang1033 N\'c2}{\lang1033  could be fitted into this pattern. A form ?}{\b\lang1033 an\'e1i\'eb}{\lang1033 
 would be quite unstable; the group }{\b\lang1033 \'e1i}{\lang1033  would tend to become a normal diphthong }{\b\lang1033 ai}{\lang1033 . Yet ?}{\b\lang1033 anai\'eb}{\lang1033 
 still does not strike me as a particularly likely form, and I could recommend it to really desperate writers only. Presently it is simply impossible to tell how the Eldar would say "has been" (presumably a very frequent word, since Tolkienian Elves "were
 ever more and more involved in the past" \endash  VT41:12!)
\par The }{\i\lang1033 imperative}{\lang1033  of }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033  is also a matter of conjecture. It is far from obvious how to say "be!" as in "be good!" I have used the form }{\b\lang1033 \'e1na}{\lang1033 , combining }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{
\lang1033  (-}{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033 ) with a prefixed variant of the imperative particle }{\b\lang1033 \'e1}{\lang1033 . By its form, this imperative }{\b\lang1033 \'e1na}{\lang1033  "be!" would have the same relationship to }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{
\lang1033  as Tolkien's word }{\b\lang1033 \'e1va}{\lang1033  "don't!" has to the simple negation }{\b\lang1033 v\'e1}{\lang1033  "no!" Yet }{\b\lang1033 \'e1na}{\lang1033 
 remains an extrapolation, and if we could have asked Tolkien what he actually had in mind, I would have been somewhat surprised if this had been his answer. So please think of }{\b\lang1033 \'e1na}{\lang1033 
 as a form which would fit into Tolkien's general system, but which is not (as far as I know!) Tolkienian as such.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par In addition to the "N" forms of the verb "to be" (}{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033 /}{\b\lang1033 nar}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 n\'e9}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 nauva}{\lang1033 
) a few entirely different forms of related meaning occurs in the material. The pre-LotR text }{\i\lang1033 F\'edriel's Song}{\lang1033  has }{\b\lang1033 ye}{\lang1033  for "is" and }{\b\lang1033 y\'e9va}{\lang1033 
 for "will be". Instead of appearing as independent words they may also be turned into }{\i\lang1033 endings}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033  and -}{\b\lang1033 i\'e9va}{\lang1033 , attested in such forms as }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1ri\'eb}{
\lang1033  "is good" and }{\b\lang1033 hostaini\'e9va}{\lang1033  "will be counted" (cf. }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1ra}{\lang1033  "good", }{\b\lang1033 hostaina}{\lang1033 
 "gathered, countered"). However, as I pointed out in Lesson Four, Tolkien may seem to have abandoned such forms. The ending -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033  has so many other meanings (gerundial ending as in }{\b\lang1033 enyali\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "recalling", abstract ending as in }{\b\lang1033 veri\'eb}{\lang1033  "boldness", feminine ending as in }{\b\lang1033 Vali\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "female Vala") that Tolkien may have decided that it should not be burdened with the meaning "is" as well. A few writers have used the ending -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033  "is", but my advice would be to let these formations from }{\i\lang1033 F\'ed
riel's Song}{\lang1033  rest in peace.
\par 
\par Another verb we should consider is definitely not a word Tolkien abandoned, for it is found in writings postdating the publication of LotR \endash  with }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 , incorporating the verb }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033 
 "is", in it. Thus it is clearly meant to coexist with }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033 , and probably expresses a somewhat different shade of meaning. We are talking about the verb }{\b\lang1033 \'eba}{\lang1033  (or with a capital E, }{\b\lang1033 E\'e4}{
\lang1033 ). 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Readers of the }{\i\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\lang1033  will remember this word from Tolkien's creation myth. God, Eru Il\'fa
vatar, grants objective existence to the Music of the Ainur with this word: }{\lang2057\cgrid0 "I know the desire of your minds that what ye have seen should verily be...even as ye yourselves are, and yet other. Therefore I say: }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 E\'e4
!}{\lang2057\cgrid0  Let these things Be!" (}{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 Ainulindal\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0 ). Tolkien explained that }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 E\'e4}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as a name of the universe is not originally a noun, but actually a verb:}{\lang1033  
}{\lang2057\cgrid0 "The Elves called the World, the Universe, E\'e4 \endash  It is" (footnote in Letters:284). "This world, or Universe, [the Creator] calls }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 E\'e4}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, an Elvish word that means 'It is' or 'Let it Be' " (MR:330).
\par So }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0  can be either the present (or aorist) tense "[it] is" or the imperative "let it be!" (In the latter sense it would parallel such one-word imperatives in -}{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 a}{\lang2057\cgrid0  as }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 heca!}{\lang2057\cgrid0  "be gone!" or }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 ela!}{\lang2057\cgrid0  "look!") How does }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0  "is" differ in meaning from }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
? It has been suggested that one of these verbs means "is" referring merely to some particular instance, while the other refers to a permanent or habitual state. In a sentence like "the man is drunk",
 one word for "is" would simply indicate that "the man" is drunk right now, whereas the other would imply that he is a drunkard by habit. Parallels to such a system can be found in Spanish (a language Tolkien loved).
\par Given the extreme scarcity of source material, nothing can be ruled out at this stage, but I would put my money on another theory. It should be noted that Tolkien translated }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 not only as "is", he also used the rendering "exists" (VT39:7). This suggests that }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0  has a more }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 absolute}{\lang2057\cgrid0  meaning than }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 n\'e1}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
. The verb }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0  is related to the noun }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 engw\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  "thing", a "thing" being perceived as "something that exists". }{\lang2057 It may be that }{\b\lang2057 n\'e1 }{\lang2057 
is a mere copula used in phrases describing the }{\i\lang2057 state }{\lang2057 of something, introducing a noun (}{\b\lang2057 samb\'eb sina n\'e1 caimasan }{\lang2057 "this room is a bedchamber"), an adjective (}{\b\lang2057 samb\'eb sina n\'e1 pitya }{
\lang2057 "this room is small") or even a prepositional phrase (}{\b\lang2057 samb\'eb sina n\'e1 ve i samb\'eb yass\'eb hirnenyet}{\lang2057 , "this room is like the room where I found them"). }{\lang2057\cgrid0 On the other hand, }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 
\'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0  refers to the solid, independent }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 existence}{\lang2057\cgrid0  or }{\i\lang2057\cgrid0 presence}{\lang2057\cgrid0  of some subject, and it can perhaps be used with no other additions than this subject (e.g. }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 Eru \'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0  = "God exists"). Tolkien informs us that the word }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'ebala}{\lang2057\cgrid0 , by its form obviously the active participle of }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
, was also used as a noun "being" \endash  denoting a spirit whose natural state is to exist without a physical body. Balrogs, for instance, were }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'ebalar}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
 (MR:165). Basically, the word only refers to "existing" ones. }{\lang1033 At the beginning of a sentence, the verb }{\b\lang1033 \'eba}{\lang1033  may possibly be used in the same sense as English "there is", to assert the }{\i\lang1033 existence}{
\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 presence}{\lang1033  of something: }{\b\lang1033 E\'e4 malta i orontissen}{\lang1033  "[there] is gold in the mountains", }{\b\lang1033 \'eba n\'e9r i sambess\'eb}{\lang1033  "[there] is a man in the room", }{\b\lang1033 \'eb
ar neld\'eb nissi i coass\'eb}{\lang1033 , "[there] are three women in the house". 
\par However, all the sentences in the previous paragraph were constructed by me. One of our very few Tolkien-made examples of }{\b\lang1033 \'eba}{\lang1033  occurring in an actual sentence forms part of Cirion's Oath. }{\b\lang1033 E\'e4}{\lang1033 
 turns up as the verb of a relative sentence: }{\b\lang1033 i Eru i or ily\'eb mahalmar }{\b\ul\lang1033 \'eba}{\b\lang1033  tennoio}{\lang1033 , "the One [God] who }{\ul\lang1033 is}{\lang1033 
 above all thrones forever". Since the literal meaning could well be that Eru }{\i\lang1033 exists}{\lang1033 
 in this sublime position, this does not contradict the interpretation set out above. In his translation of the Lord's Prayer, Tolkien rendered "[our Father] who is in heaven" as ...}{\b\lang1033 i \'eba han \'eba}{\lang1033 , which apparently is }{
\i\lang1033 not}{\lang1033  a direct translation of the traditional wording. It has been theorized that this means "[our Father] who is beyond E\'e4", sc. beyond the created universe, though the second }{\b\lang1033 \'eba}{\lang1033  is not capit
alized as a name in Tolkien's text. The first }{\b\lang1033 \'eba}{\lang1033  is certainly the verb "is". 
\par It should be noted that }{\b\lang1033 \'eba}{\lang1033 , rather than }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033 , is the verb to use when describing the }{\i\lang1033 position}{\lang1033  of something (the position being specified either by a phr
ase including a preposition, like }{\b\ul\lang1033 or}{\b\lang1033  ily\'eb mahalmar}{\lang1033  "}{\ul\lang1033 above}{\lang1033  all thrones" or }{\b\ul\lang1033 han}{\b\lang1033  \'eba}{\lang1033  "}{\ul\lang1033 beyond}{\lang1033  E\'e4
" [?] in the sentences above, or by a noun appearing in the locative case). Perhaps we could have sentences like }{\b\lang2057 i samb\'eb yass\'eb \'eba i harma \'eba or i samb\'eb yass\'eb \'eba i n\'e9r s\'ed }{\lang2057 
"the room where the treasure is, is above the room where the man is now" \endash  referring not so much to mere states as to }{\i\lang2057 existence}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 presence}{\lang2057 , }{\i\lang2057 position}{\lang2057 
. This is the best the present grammarian can do with so few examples.
\par How is }{\b\lang2057 \'eba}{\lang2057  inflected? }{\b\lang2057 E\'e4}{\lang2057  itself would seem to be the present or aorist form; the imperative (used by Eru in the}{\i\lang2057  Ainulindal\'eb}{\lang2057 ) is identical. Perhaps }{\b\lang2057 \'eba}{
\lang2057  can also function as the infinitive. The future tense could be something like }{\b\lang2057 euva}{\lang2057 . The perfect "has existed" seems impossible to reconstruct with even a shadow of confidence. As for the }{\i\lang2057 past}{\lang2057 
 tense, it was uncertain when I first published this Quenya course, but as I argued, it had to be either }{\b\lang2057 \'eban\'eb}{\lang2057  or }{\b\lang2057 eng\'eb}{\lang2057 
. The latter form is now confirmed by VT43:36, occurring in Tolkien's abortive translation of the }{\i\lang2057 Gloria Patri}{\lang2057 : }{\b\lang2057 Alcar i ataren ar i yondon ar i airef\'eban tamb\'eb }{\b\ul\lang2057 eng\'eb}{\b\lang2057  i}{
\lang2057 ... "Glory to the Father and the Son and to the Holy Spirit, as [it] }{\ul\lang2057 was}{\lang2057  [in] the..." (the next word would be "beginning", but Tolkien never got that far).
\par }{\b\lang2057 Eng\'eb}{\lang2057  as the past tense of }{\b\lang2057 \'eba}{\lang2057  may seem like a rather surprising form, but it is historically justified: Tolkien apparently meant }{\b\lang2057 \'eba}{\lang2057  to represent primitive }{\i\lang2057 
e\'f1\'e2}{\lang2057 , the symbol }{\i\lang2057 \'f1}{\lang2057  representing the }{\i\lang2057 ng}{\lang2057  of English }{\i\lang2057 king}{\lang2057 . In Quenya, this sound had been lost between vowels. However, the past 
tense had been formed by means of nasal infixion, and before }{\i\lang2057 \'f1}{\lang2057  the infix manifested as another }{\i\lang2057 \'f1}{\lang2057 . Thus we get }{\i\lang2057 e\'f1\'f1}{\lang2057 -, and this double }{\i\lang2057 \'f1\'f1}{
\lang2057  later became Quenya }{\b\lang2057 ng}{\lang2057  (as in English }{\i\lang2057 finger}{\lang2057 , with a distinct }{\i\lang2057 g}{\lang2057  sound): Thus the past tense of }{\b\lang2057 \'eba}{\lang2057  came to be }{\b\lang2057 eng\'eb}{
\lang2057 . Only one other verb of this class is known, }{\b\lang2057 t\'eba}{\lang2057  "indicate" with past tense }{\b\lang2057 teng\'eb}{\lang2057  (see VT39:6-7). It was this example that suggested that the past tense of }{\b\lang2057 \'eba}{
\lang2057  is }{\b\lang2057 eng\'eb}{\lang2057 , before VT43:36 provided explicit confirmation of this.}{\lang2057\cgrid0 
\par The verb }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eba}{\lang2057\cgrid0  can presumably receive pronominal endings like any other verb, e.g.  }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'eban}{\lang2057\cgrid0  "I exist",  }{\b\lang2057\cgrid0 \'ebalm\'eb}{\lang2057\cgrid0  "we exist", }{
\b\lang2057\cgrid0 enges}{\lang2057\cgrid0  "it existed", etc.}{\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\b\i\cf2\lang3081 MA}{\b\cf2\lang3081 : AN INTERROGATIVE PARTICLE?}{\cf2\lang3081 
\par }{\lang1033 In the previous lesson, we introduced the words }{\b\lang1033 man}{\lang1033  "who?", }{\b\lang1033 mana}{\lang1033  "what?" and }{\b\lang1033 manen}{\lang1033  "how?" They 
can be used to construct certain kinds of questions,  but the commonest kind of question is not exemplified in published material: How do we construct the kind of question that may be answered with a simple "yes" or "no"?
\par \tab English uses various procedures to get from a simple assertion to a }{\i\lang1033 question}{\lang1033 
 about whether something is actually true. Assertions like "it is so" or "he has come" can be turned into a questions by fronting the verb: "Is it so?", "Has he come?" However, in contemporary English, this proced
ure only works with a few verbs. An assertion like "he wrote the book" is turned into a question by adding a form of the verb "to do" at the beginning of the sentence and turn what used to be the finite verb into an infinitive: "}{\ul\lang1033 Did}{
\lang1033  he }{\ul\lang1033 write}{\lang1033  the book?"
\par \tab Obviously, the simplest way of turning an assertion (a }{\i\lang1033 declarative statement}{\lang1033 
) into a question would be to simply slip in some kind of particle that merely signals, "This is not an assertion that something is so and so, but a question about }{\i\lang1033 whether}{\lang1033  it is so a
nd so." Many languages of our own world do employ such particles (e.g. Polish }{\i\lang1033 czy}{\lang1033 
), and this simple and elegant way of constructing yes/no questions seems to have considerable appeal to language-constructors as well. Esperanto has the interrogative particle }{\i\lang1033 chu}{\lang1033  (}{\i\lang1033 cxu}{\lang1033 
), apparently based on the Polish word, and the sentence "he wrote the book" \endash  }{\i\lang1033 li skribis la libron}{\lang1033  \endash  is turned into a question "did he write the book?" simply by adding }{\i\lang1033 chu}{\lang1033 
 at the beginning: }{\i\lang1033 Chu li skribis la libron?}{\lang1033 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 But what about Quenya? Still clinging to this example, how do we turn the declarative statement }{\b\lang1033 tences i parma}{\lang1033 
 "(s)he wrote the book" into a question? Does Quenya have an interrogative particle we can slip in?
\par In PM:357, quoted in the previous lesson, Tolkien refers to }{\i\lang1033 ma }{\lang1033 or }{\i\lang1033 man}{\lang1033  as an "Eldarin interrogative element" (PM:357). }{\b\lang1033 Man}{\lang1033 
 is the Quenya word for "who", but may the shortest possible "interrogative element" }{\b\lang1033 ma}{\lang1033  function as an interrogative particle? Some writers have made this assumption. It may be noted that one Quenya verb for "ask" is }{
\b\lang1033 maquet}{\lang1033 - (past tense }{\b\lang1033 maquent\'eb}{\lang1033 , PM:403). Since }{\b\lang1033 maquet}{\lang1033 - transparently means "}{\i\lang1033 ma}{\lang1033 
-say", it may be suspected that in some way or another, Quenya questions often involve the element }{\b\lang1033 ma}{\lang1033 .
\par It has come to my knowledge that there is a Tolkien manuscript which does refer to }{\b\lang1033 ma}{\lang1033  as an interrogative particle. If Tolkien meant a particle like Polish }{\i\lang1033 czy}{\lang1033  or Esperanto }{\i\lang1033 chu}{\lang1033 
, we may apparently turn a declarative statement into a yes/no question simply by slipping in a }{\b\lang1033 ma}{\lang1033 , most likely at the beginning of the sentence (no attested examples):
\par 
\par }{\b\lang1033 Tences i parma}{\lang1033  "(S)he wrote the book" > }{\b\lang1033 Ma tences i parma?}{\lang1033  "Did (s)he write the book?"
\par }{\b\lang1033 N\'eds enta n\'e1 Elda}{\lang1033  "That woman is an Elf" > }{\b\lang1033 Ma n\'eds enta n\'e1 Elda?}{\lang1033  "Is that woman an Elf?"
\par }{\b\lang1033 E\'e4 malta i orontess\'eb}{\lang1033  "[There] is gold in the mountain" > }{\b\lang1033 Ma \'eba malta i orontess\'eb?}{\lang1033  "Is [there] gold in the mountain?"
\par }{\b\lang1033 I n\'e9r caruva coa}{\lang1033  "The man is going to build a house" > }{\b\lang1033 Ma i n\'e9r caruva coa?}{\lang1033  "Is the man going to build a house?"
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par Conceivably }{\b\lang1033 ma}{\lang1033  might also be used in so-called }{\i\lang1033 dependent}{\lang1033  questions, with the force of English "whether": }{\b\lang1033 Umin ista }{\b\ul\lang1033 ma}{\b\lang1033  ut\'falies}{\lang1033 , "I don't know }{
\ul\lang1033 whether}{\lang1033  (s)he has come." This is speculation, however, and it must be emphasized that we have yet to see the interrogative particle }{\b\lang1033 ma}{\lang1033  in }{\i\lang1033 any}{\lang1033 
 actual Quenya sentence written by Tolkien. The manuscript in which he refers to }{\b\lang1033 ma}{\lang1033 
 as an interrogative particle is apparently quite early, so this particle may well belong to some variant of "Qenya" rather than the more LotR-compatible forms of Quenya. 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Even assuming that the system I presupposed when constructing
 the examples above does indeed correspond to Tolkien's intentions at some stage, he may very well have decided upon something else later. Indeed certain fragments of post-LotR Quenya material includes a word }{\b\lang1033 ma}{\lang1033 
 of a quite different meaning: it functions as an indefinite pronoun "something, a thing" (VT42:34). Whether this implies that }{\b\lang1033 ma}{\lang1033 
 as an interrogative particle had been abandoned is impossible to say (PM:357 at least confirms that }{\i\lang1033 ma}{\lang1033  as an interrogative "}{\i\lang1033 element}{\lang1033 " survived into the post-LotR period). Whether the two }{\b\lang1033 ma
}{\lang1033 's can coexist in the same version of Quenya is a matter of taste, unless it turns out that Tolkien actually addressed this question in some manuscript (and I wouldn't hold my breath). Presently, the system sketched above is probably the b
est we can do when it comes to constructing yes/no questions in Quenya.}{\b\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\b\i\cf2\lang3081 SA}{\b\cf2\lang3081  INTRODUCING NOMINAL CLAUSES}{\cf2\lang3081 
\par }{\lang1033 We have introduced several words that may be translated "that": the pronoun }{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033  and the demonstratives }{\b\lang1033 enta}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 tana}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 tanya}{\lang1033 ).
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 There is, however, another kind of "that" as well \endash  very common in any substantial text. We are talking about "that" as a particle introducing so-called }{\i\lang1033 nominal clauses}{
\lang1033 .
\par As we know, nouns can take on various functions in a sentence. Very often they appear as the subject or object of a verb, as when the noun }{\b\lang1033 Elda}{\lang1033  "Elf" functions as the object of the verb }{\b\lang1033 ista}{\lang1033 
- "know" in the sentence}{\b\lang1033  istan Elda}{\lang1033  "I know an Elf". Sometimes, however, it is useful to treat an entire sentence as a noun, so that it can take on noun
-like functions in a sentence. Consider a simple sentence like "you are here". If we want to treat this sentence as a noun and slip it into a longer sentence to function as (say) the object, English may signal the noun-like status of the words "you are he
re" by placing the word "that" in front of them: "That you are here". Now this entire phrase, a so-called }{\i\lang1033 nominal clause}{\lang1033 , can function as the object of a verb: "I know }{\ul\lang1033 that you are here}{\lang1033 
". It could also be used as the }{\i\lang1033 subject}{\lang1033  of a sentence, as in "}{\ul\lang1033 that you are here}{\lang1033 
 is good". (But in the latter case, English would often prefer to slip in a meaningless dummy-subject "it" at the beginning of the sentence and place the true subject at the end: "}{\ul\lang1033 It}{\lang1033  is good }{\ul\lang1033 that you are here}{
\lang1033 .)
\par What, then, is the Quenya equivalent of "that" as a particle forming such nominal clauses?
\par Our sole attestation of this important particle comes from a rather obscure source. A few years ago, a person who called himself Michael Dawson made a posting to the Tolkien Internet mailing list. He cla
imed to be quoting at two removes from an old Tolkien letter which could not be dated more precisely than "years" earlier than 1968. It was a Quenya greeting including the words }{\b\lang1033 merin sa haryaly\'eb alass\'eb}{\lang1033  \endash 
 which is supposed to mean, literally, "I wish that you have happiness". (The initial }{\b\lang1033 merin}{\lang1033  actually appeared as "meriu" in Dawson's post; lower-case }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 
 are often very difficult to distinguish in Tolkien's handwriting. "Meriu" would be a quite meaningless form, and the translation provided settles the matter.) As we see, the word }{\b\lang1033 sa}{\lang1033 
 is here used as a particle turning the sentence }{\b\lang1033 haryaly\'eb alass\'eb}{\lang1033  "you have happiness" into a nominal clause, so that it can function as the object of the verb }{\b\lang1033 merin}{\lang1033  "I want/wish".
\par There are several questionable points here. F
or one thing, not everyone is convinced that the "Merin" sentence, as it is often called, is genuine at all. I am told that various efforts to get in touch with this Michael Dawson have so far proved futile, and it is somewhat disturbing to notice that hi
s
 posting was made on April 1. On the other hand, Carl F. Hostetter (who has seen nearly all of Tolkien's linguistic manuscripts) briefly commented on this sentence in VT41:18 and apparently recognized it as genuine, though he has later specified that it d
oes not occur in any manuscript he knows of. The word }{\b\lang1033 sa}{\lang1033  is not inherently implausible; it could mean basically "it" (related to the ending -}{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 ), so that }{\b\lang1033 merin sa haryaly\'eb alass\'eb}{
\lang1033  originally or basically signifies "I wish it [, namely that] you have happiness". But of course, even if the word }{\b\lang1033 sa}{\lang1033 
 is genuine Tolkien, it is impossible to say what stage of Q(u)enya it belongs to. Assuming that the Merin sentence is actually written by Tolkien, I would say that it is probably quite early, since its vocabulary corresponds so well to that of the }{
\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033  (of the mid-thirties \endash  notice the use of the verb }{\b\lang1033 harya}{\lang1033 - "have, possess", otherwise only attested in Etym). So given the ever-changing nature of Tolkien's conception, }{\b\lang1033 sa}{
\lang1033  as a particle forming nominal clauses may well have been abandoned by the time Tolkien published LotR. Yet writers can hardly do without this important word, and presently }{\b\lang1033 sa}{\lang1033  is our sole alternative.
\par Accepting }{\b\lang1033 sa}{\lang1033  as a word for this meaning, our example above \endash  "I know }{\ul\lang1033 that}{\lang1033  you are here" \endash  could perhaps be rendered into Quenya something like }{\b\lang1033 istan }{\b\ul\lang1033 sa}{
\b\lang1033  \'ebaly\'eb sinom\'eb}{\lang1033  (cf. }{\b\lang1033 ista}{\lang1033 - "to know", }{\b\lang1033 sinom\'eb}{\lang1033  "in this place; here" \endash  and above we theorized that }{\b\lang1033 \'eba}{\lang1033  rather than }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{
\lang1033  is the word used for "is" when a certain }{\i\lang1033 position}{\lang1033  is discussed). "That you are here is good" could presumably likewise be rendered }{\b\lang1033 sa \'ebaly\'eb sinom\'eb n\'e1 m\'e1ra}{\lang1033 
. "It is good that you are here" could correspond to something like }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1 m\'e1ra sa \'ebaly\'eb sinom\'eb}{\lang1033  (if the verb }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033  "is" c
an be fronted). In this or any other context, Quenya would hardly need a dummy-subject like the "it" of the English sentence, so I would not expect to see }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1s}{\lang1033  or whatever.
\par In (slightly archaic) English, a "that"-clause may describe an }{\i\lang1033 intention}{\lang1033 ; here is a Tolkienian example: "The titles that [the Vala Orom\'eb] bore were many and glorious; but he withheld them at that time, }{\ul\lang1033 that}{
\lang1033  the Quendi should not be afraid" (WJ:401; modern idiom would slip in a "so" before "that", but the meaning remains the same). It would be interesting to know whether a Quenya }{\b\lang1033 sa}{\lang1033 
-clause can be used in this sense. If not, we do not really know how to express this meaning in Quenya.
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\cf2\lang3081 Summary of Lesson Twenty:}{\lang3081  The verb "to be" is poorly attested in Quenya. }{\b\lang3081 N\'e1}{\lang3081  means "is"; it has been hinted that }{\b\lang3081 n\'e9}{\lang3081 
 is the word for "was"; }{\b\lang3081 nauva}{\lang3081  is attested as the future tense "will be". The attested example }{\b\lang3081 naly\'eb}{\lang3081 
 "thou art" seems to indicate that the normal pronominal endings can be added to forms of the verb "to be"; }{\b\lang3081 n\'e1}{\lang3081  assumes the shorter form }{\b\lang3081 na}{\lang3081 - before endings (cf. also }{\b\lang3081 nar}{\lang3081 
 "are"). If }{\b\lang3081 n\'e9}{\lang3081  is indeed the word for "was", analogy would suggest that it appears as }{\b\lang3081 ne}{\lang3081 
- when endings are to be added. Instead of using forms of "to be" with a pronominal ending attached, it is also permissible to use an independent pronoun and leave out the copula altogether (cf. a wording like }{\b\lang3081 aistana ely\'eb}{\lang3081 
 "blessed [art] thou" in Tolkien's }{\i\lang3081 Hail Mary}{\lang3081  translation). Another verb also translated "is" is }{\b\lang3081 \'eba}{\lang3081  (past tense }{\b\lang3081 eng\'eb}{\lang3081 
), which more properly means "exists": it would be used for "is" in contexts discussing the }{\i\lang3081 presence}{\lang3081 , }{\i\lang3081 existence}{\lang3081  or }{\i\lang3081 position}{\lang3081  of something (in the latter case }{\b\lang3081 \'eba}
{\lang3081  may connect with a prepositional phrase, as in the attested example }{\b\lang3081 i or ily\'eb mahalmar }{\b\ul\lang3081 \'eba}{\lang3081  "[God,] who }{\ul\lang3081 is}{\lang3081  above all thrones"). \endash 
 According to certain pieces of evidence, Quenya (or at least some variant of "Qenya") had an interrogative particle }{\b\lang3081 ma}{\lang3081 
. Presumably it can be added (at the beginning?) of declarative statements to turn them into yes/no questions. \endash  According to one (possibly dubious) source, the form }{\b\lang3081 sa}{\lang3081 
 can be used for "that" as a particle introducing nominal clauses (as in "I know }{\ul\lang3081 that}{\lang3081  you are here", "he said }{\ul\lang3081 that}{\lang3081  this is true", etc.)}{\b\lang3081 
\par }{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 VOCABULARY}{\lang3081 
\par 
\par }{\b\lang3081 nert\'eba}{\lang3081  "ninth"
\par }{\b\lang3081 quain\'eba}{\lang3081  "tenth" }{\fs20\lang3081 (So according to a text on Eldarin numerals published in VT42. This presupposes another word for "ten" than the form }{\b\fs20\lang3081 cainen}{\fs20\lang3081  occurring in the Etymologies 
\endash  perhaps }{\b\fs20\lang3081 quain\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 , not attested by itself.  Maybe }{\b\fs20\lang3081 cainen}{\fs20\lang3081  would correspond to an ordinal "tenth" something like }{\b\fs20\lang3081 cainenya}{\fs20\lang3081 
, and perhaps writers should use either }{\b\fs20\lang3081 cainen}{\fs20\lang3081 /}{\b\fs20\lang3081 cainenya}{\fs20\lang3081  or }{\b\fs20\lang3081 quain\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 7}{\b\fs20\lang3081 quain\'eba}{\fs20\lang3081 
, but to complete our list of Quenya ordinals 1st-10th we will use the attested form }{\b\fs20\lang3081 quain\'eba}{\fs20\lang3081  here.)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 ma}{\lang3081 , }{\i\lang3081 possible}{\lang3081  interrogative particle
\par }{\b\lang3081 sa}{\lang3081 , "that" introducing nominal clauses }{\fs20\lang3081 (according to a source of somewhat questionable value)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 n\'f3m\'eb}{\lang3081  "place"
\par }{\b\lang3081 sinom\'eb}{\lang3081  "in this place" or simply "here" }{\fs20\lang3081 (apparently combining }{\b\fs20\lang3081 si}{\fs20\lang3081 - as in }{\b\fs20\lang3081 sina}{\fs20\lang3081  "this" with -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 nom\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 
, a shortened form of }{\b\fs20\lang3081 n\'f3m\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  "place", hence }{\b\fs20\lang3081 sinom\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  = "[in] this place")}{\i\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 tenna}{\lang3081  preposition "until, as far as"
\par }{\b\lang3081 \'eba}{\lang3081  verb "is" = "exists" }{\fs20\lang3081 (past tense either }{\b\fs20\lang3081 \'eban\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  or }{\b\fs20\lang3081 eng\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 , future tense perhaps }{\b\fs20\lang3081 euva}{\fs20\lang3081 )
\par }{\b\lang3081 mal}{\lang3081  conjunction "but"
\par }{\b\lang3081 n\'e9}{\lang3081  has been hinted to be the past tense of }{\b\lang3081 n\'e1}{\lang3081  "is", hence "was"
\par }{\b\lang3081 ista}{\lang3081 - "to know" }{\fs20\lang3081 (notice irregular past tense }{\b\fs20\lang3081 sint\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  instead of **}{\b\fs20\lang3081 istan\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 ; perhaps the perfect "has known" should similarly be }{
\b\fs20\lang3081 isinti\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 )
\par }{\b\lang3081 lerta}{\lang3081 - "can" in the sense of "be allowed to" }{\fs20\lang3081 (English often uses "may" in this sense; see note below)
\par }{\lang3081 
\par }{\fs20\lang3081 NOTE #1: Quenya has several verbs corresponding to English "can". As explained in a Tolkien manuscript published in VT41, at least three Quenya verbs can be used to express the idea of "be able to". The verb }{\b\fs20\lang3081 pol}{
\fs20\lang3081 - that we have introduced earlier primarily means to be physically able to do something (cf. the adjective }{\b\fs20\lang3081 polda}{\fs20\lang3081  "[physically] strong", apparently related to this verb). The verb }{\b\fs20\lang3081 lerta}
{\fs20\lang3081 - means to be }{\i\fs20\lang3081 allowed}{\fs20\lang3081  to do something, to be }{\i\fs20\lang3081 free}{\fs20\lang3081  to do something because there is no prohibition \endash  though in some contexts it may also be interchangeable with 
}{\b\fs20\lang3081 pol}{\fs20\lang3081 -. The verb }{\b\fs20\lang3081 ista}{\fs20\lang3081 - "to know" (pa.t. }{\b\fs20\lang3081 sint\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 ) may be combined with an infinitive to express "can" in the sense of "know how to", referring to }{
\i\fs20\lang3081 intellectual}{\fs20\lang3081  ability. Thus }{\b\fs20\lang3081 istas tec\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  would mean "he can write [because he knows the letters of the alphabet]". }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Polis tec\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 
 would be "he can write" in the sense of "he is physically able to write [because his hands are not paralyzed or tied up or something]". }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Lertas tec\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 
 would mean "he can write" in the sense of "he may [= is allowed to] write".
\par 
\par NOTE #2: Above I listed }{\b\fs20\lang3081 mal}{\fs20\lang3081  as the Quenya conjunction "but". Actually 
many words for "but" appear in Tolkien's material, indeed so many that it seems dubious whether he really meant them to belong to a single form of Quenya. The }{\i\fs20\lang3081 Etymologies}{\fs20\lang3081 , entry }{\i\fs20\lang3081 NDAN}{\fs20\lang3081 
, lists }{\b\fs20\lang3081 n\'e1}{\fs20\lang3081  or }{\b\fs20\lang3081 n\'e1n}{\fs20\lang3081  as Quenya words for "but". Firiel's Song uses the short form }{\b\fs20\lang3081 nan}{\fs20\lang3081 
 (LR:72), a word many post-Tolkien writers have also used. However, }{\b\fs20\lang3081 n\'e1}{\fs20\lang3081  also means "is", and }{\b\fs20\lang3081 n\'e1n}{\fs20\lang3081  or }{\b\fs20\lang3081 nan}{\fs20\lang3081 
 might perhaps also mean "I am". Other words for "but" turn up in various tentative Quenya renderings of the Lord's Prayer: }{\b\fs20\lang3081 anat}{\fs20\lang3081 , }{\b\fs20\lang3081 on\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 , }{\b\fs20\lang3081 ono}{\fs20\lang3081 
 (VT43:8-9); yet another late source has }{\b\fs20\lang3081 n\'f3}{\fs20\lang3081  (VT41:13). However, }{\b\fs20\lang3081 n\'f3}{\fs20\lang3081  may also mean "before", and the forms }{\b\fs20\lang3081 anat}{\fs20\lang3081 , }{\b\fs20\lang3081 on\'eb}{
\fs20\lang3081  and }{\b\fs20\lang3081 ono}{\fs20\lang3081  were perhaps superseded by the word Tolkien used for "but" in the final version of his Lord's Prayer rendering: }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Mal}{\fs20\lang3081 . Of all the words for "bu
t" that have so far been published, }{\b\fs20\lang3081 mal}{\fs20\lang3081  strikes me as the least ambiguous, and this is the word we will use here.}{\i\lang3081 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 
\par EXERCISES}{\lang3081 
\par 
\par 1. Translate into English:
\par 
\par }{\i\lang3081 A.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Ely\'eb Nauco, l\'e1 Elda.
\par }{\i\lang3081 B}{\lang3081 . }{\b\lang3081 Cennen sa i nero ranco n\'e9 r\'e1cina.}{\b\i\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 C.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 I aran n\'e9 taura, mal i t\'e1ri n\'e9 saila l\'e1 i aran.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 D.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Ma sintely\'eb sa nu i coa \'eba nurtaina harma?}{\i\lang3081 
\par E.}{\b\lang3081  Ma lertan lelya n\'f3m\'eb sinallo?}{\i\lang3081 
\par F.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 \'c1va suc\'eb, an \'eba sangwa yulmalyass\'eb!
\par }{\i\lang3081 G.}{\b\lang3081  Ma engely\'eb sinom\'eb i quain\'eba auress\'eb \'edr\'eb tullent\'eb?}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 H.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Istamm\'eb sa \'eba nulda samb\'eb coa sinass\'eb, mal l\'e1 ih\'edriemmes, ar tenna hirimmes \'favamm\'eb ista mana \'eba i sambess\'eb.
\par }{\lang3081 
\par 2. Translate into Quenya (for convenience using L-forms rather than T-forms to translate "you"):
\par 
\par }{\i\lang3081 I.}{\lang3081  I was rich }{\i\lang3081 [several possible translations]}{\lang3081 .
\par }{\i\lang3081 J.}{\lang3081  The king said: "You may not go to the place whence [}{\b\lang3081 yallo}{\lang3081 ] you have come", but I know that I will go thither [}{\b\lang3081 tanna}{\lang3081 ].
\par }{\i\lang3081 K.}{\lang3081  I can [= know how to] read, but I cannot read in the darkness.
\par }{\i\lang3081 L.}{\lang3081  We }{\i\lang3081 (incl.)}{\lang3081  know that Elves exist.
\par }{\i\lang3081 M.}{\lang3081  Did they dwell [}{\b\lang3081 mar}{\lang3081 -] here until he ninth year when the warriors came?}{\fs20\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 N}{\lang3081 . We }{\i\lang3081 (excl.)}{\lang3081  know that the men could speak the Elven-tongue [}{\b\lang3081 Eldalamb\'eb}{\lang3081 ], but not the Dwarf-tongue [}{\b\lang3081 Naucolamb\'eb}{\lang3081 ].
\par }{\i\lang3081 O}{\lang3081 . The women said that you have seen the great worm [}{\b\lang3081 ango}{\lang3081 ] that was in the mountain.
\par }{\i\lang3081 P}{\lang3081 . On the tenth day the Sun was bright.
\par 
\par }{\i\lang3081 This is the last regular Quenya lesson. Various appendices may be downloaded from this URL:}{\lang3081 
\par }{\cgrid0 http://www.uib.no/People/hnohf/qappend.rtf}{\lang1033 
\par }}