{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff0\deflang1033\deflangfe1044{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f2\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 02070309020205020404}Courier New;}{\f3\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05050102010706020507}Symbol;}{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Times;}
{\f5\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Helvetica;}{\f6\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Courier;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Geneva;}
{\f8\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Tms Rmn;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Helv;}{\f10\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Serif;}
{\f11\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Sans Serif;}{\f12\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}New York;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}System;}
{\f14\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05000000000000000000}Wingdings;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604030504040204}Tahoma;}{\f16\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0500000000000000}Tengwar Sindarin;}
{\f17\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000400000000000000}Tengwar Parmaite;}{\f18\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Marlett;}{\f19\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Reference 1;}
{\f20\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Reference 2;}{\f21\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05020603050405020304}Times New Roman Special G1;}{\f22\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05020603050405020304}Times New Roman Special G2;}
{\f23\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0506020202030204}Arial Narrow;}{\f24\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0a04020102020204}Arial Black;}{\f25\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020404030301010803}Garamond;}
{\f26\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02050604050505020204}Bookman Old Style;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0806030902050204}Impact;}{\f28\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 050b0604020202020204}Arial Special G1;}
{\f29\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 050b0604020202020204}Arial Special G2;}{\f30\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 050b0506020202030204}Arial Narrow Special G1;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 050b0506020202030204}Arial Narrow Special G2;}
{\f32\fscript\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 030f0702030302020204}Comic Sans MS;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604030504040204}Verdana;}{\f34\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Angerthas;}
{\f35\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Angerthas Moria;}{\f36\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0500000000000000}Tengwar Quenya;}{\f37\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0500000000000000}AngloSaxon Runes;}
{\f38\froman\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}.;}{\f39\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}GillSans;}{\f40\fnil\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial Rounded MT Bold;}
{\f131\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Tahoma CE;}{\f132\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Tahoma Cyr;}{\f134\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Tahoma Greek;}{\f135\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Tahoma Tur;}{\f136\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Tahoma Baltic;}
{\f179\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial Narrow CE;}{\f180\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Narrow Cyr;}{\f182\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Narrow Greek;}{\f183\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Narrow Tur;}{\f184\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Narrow Baltic;}
{\f185\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial Black CE;}{\f186\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Black Cyr;}{\f188\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Black Greek;}{\f189\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Black Tur;}{\f190\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Black Baltic;}
{\f191\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Garamond CE;}{\f192\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Garamond Cyr;}{\f194\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Garamond Greek;}{\f195\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Garamond Tur;}{\f196\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Garamond Baltic;}
{\f197\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Bookman Old Style CE;}{\f198\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Bookman Old Style Cyr;}{\f200\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Bookman Old Style Greek;}{\f201\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Bookman Old Style Tur;}
{\f202\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Bookman Old Style Baltic;}{\f203\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Impact CE;}{\f204\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Impact Cyr;}{\f206\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Impact Greek;}{\f207\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Impact Tur;}
{\f208\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Impact Baltic;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid 
\snext0 Normal;}{\s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \b\f1\fs28\lang1044\kerning28\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \b\i\f1\lang1044\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \f1\lang1044\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\s4\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \b\f1\lang1044\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 4;}{
\s5\sb240\sa60\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs22\lang1044\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 5;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}{\s15\fi-283\li283\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext15 List;}{
\s16\fi-283\li566\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext16 List 2;}{\s17\li283\sa120\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext17 List Continue;}{\s18\sa120\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright 
\fs28\lang1044\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext18 Body Text;}{\s19\li283\sa120\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext19 Body Text 2;}}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\info{\title LESSON ELEVEN}{\author Helge K\'e5re Fauskanger}
{\operator Helge K\'e5re Fauskanger}{\creatim\yr2002\mo12\dy11\hr1\min3}{\revtim\yr2002\mo12\dy11\hr1\min3}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages73}{\nofwords31527}{\nofchars-32766}{\*\company  }{\nofcharsws0}{\vern73}}
\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl1417\margr1417\margt1417\margb1417 \deftab708\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphhotz425\hyphcaps0\formshade\viewkind4\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot \fet0\sectd \linex0\headery709\footery709\colsx709\endnhere\sectdefaultcl 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid {\b\fs36\cf6\lang3081 LESSON ELEVEN}{\b\fs32\lang3081 
\par The concept of cases. The Genitive case.
\par }{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 CASES}{\cf2\lang3081 
\par }{\lang3081 Lessons 1-10 have mainly been concerned with adjectives and verbs. As for nouns, we have only discussed how their plural and
 dual forms are constructed. There is, however, much more to say about the inflection of the Quenya noun. The second half of this course will predominantly be concerned with the elaborate }{\i\lang3081 case}{\lang3081 
 system of Quenya, which is indeed the most characteristic feature of the language. It is in the treatment of nouns that the grammatical structure of Quenya most clearly reflects two of Tolkien's inspirations, Finnish and Latin.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 What, linguistically speaking, are cases? A noun may have many functions in a sentence. Eng
lish may indicate what function a noun has by means of word order alone. In a sentence like "the man loves the woman", it is merely the word order that gives away the fact that "the man" is the subject and "the woman" is the object. The rule that very ear
l
y slips into the subconscious mind of children exposed to English goes something like this: "The noun in front of the predicate verb is its subject, while the noun that comes after it is normally its object." Where word order is not enough, English may sl
ip in clarifying prepositions in front of a noun, e.g. "to" in a sentence like "the Elf gives a gift }{\i\lang3081 to}{\lang3081 
 the Dwarf". There are languages that wouldn't need to have a "to" here; instead the noun "Dwarf" would occur in a special, inflectional form.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 \tab Of course, Quenya also has prepositions, and the student will already have encountered several: }{\b\lang3081 nu}{\lang3081  "under", }{\b\lang3081 or}{\lang3081  "over", }{\b\lang3081 imb\'eb}{
\lang3081  "between", }{\b\lang3081 ve}{\lang3081  "as, like", }{\b\lang3081 mir}{\lang3081  "into" (which word, by the way, is formed from the simpler preposition }{\b\lang3081 mi}{\lang3081  "in"). But it is a characteristic feat
ure of Quenya grammar that where English would often place a preposition in front of a noun, or rely on word order alone to indicate what the function of a noun is, }{\i\lang3081 Quenya would have a special form of the noun}{\lang3081 
 which by itself indicates its function. These various, specialized noun-forms are called }{\i\lang3081 cases}{\lang3081 . For instance, our example above \endash  "the Elf gives a gift }{\cf6\lang3081 to}{\lang3081  the Dwarf" \endash 
 would translate into Quenya something like }{\b\lang3081 i Elda anta anna i Nauco}{\b\cf6\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 , where the }{\i\lang3081 case ending}{\lang3081  -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  added to }{\b\lang3081 Nauco}{\lang3081 
 "Dwarf" corresponds to the English preposition "to". (This particular case is called the }{\i\lang3081 dative}{\lang3081 , to be fully discussed in Lesson 13.)
\par \tab Certain prepositions may also demand that the word (noun or pronoun) following them appears inflected for some case \endash  sometimes quite irrespectiv
e of the normal, independent function of this case. The relevant preposition is then said to "take" (or "govern") this or that case. The same phenomenon may be found in English, if one looks closely. While the case system is all but gone as far as English
 nouns are concerned, many English }{\i\lang3081 pronouns}{\lang3081  at least preserve a specific form that is used when the pronoun is the object and not the subject of a sentence. That is why "Peter saw he" is wrong; it must be "Peter saw }{
\i\lang3081 him}{\lang3081 ", with the object form of this pronou
n. ("He" is the subject form instead, and therefore quite proper in a sentence like "he saw Peter".) But while the primary function of the form "him" is to function as the object of a sentence, very many prepositions also insist on being followed by this 
form. For instance, "from he" does not sound well; it must be "from him", though "him" is not the object of a sentence here.
\par 
\par The Quenya noun-forms so far discussed (whether singular, plural or dual) are examples of the }{\i\lang3081 nominative}{\lang3081  case. The most important g
rammatical function of the nominative is that this is the form a noun has when it functions as the subject of a verb. In Lesson Five, we very briefly touched on another form of the noun \endash  the }{\i\lang3081 accusative}{\lang3081 
 case, which is the form a noun assumes when it is the }{\i\lang3081 object}{\lang3081 
 of a verb. Modern English does not preserve any distinction between nominative and accusative in nouns (though such a distinction persists in parts of the pronoun table, like nominative "he" vs. accusative "him" in our examples above). English noun
s do not change their form dependent on whether the noun is the subject or the object of the sentence \endash 
 and neither do nouns in Third Age Quenya. Tolkien imagined an archaic form of Quenya, "Book Quenya", that did have an accusative case distinct in form from the nominative. The noun "ship" would be }{\b\lang3081 cirya}{\lang3081  (pl. }{\b\lang3081 ciryar
}{\lang3081 ) if it was used as the subject of a sentence, but }{\b\lang3081 ciry\'e1}{\lang3081  (pl. }{\b\lang3081 ciryai}{\lang3081 
) if it appeared as the object: nominative vs. accusative. However, the distinct accusative disappeared from the language as spoken in Middle-earth; the forms }{\b\lang3081 cirya}{\lang3081  (pl. }{\b\lang3081 ciryar}{\lang3081 
) came to be used both as subject and object. So either you can say that in Third Age Quenya, the nominative and the accusative cases have come to be identical in form, or you can say that the nominative ha
s taken over the functions of the distinct accusative so that in effect, there is no accusative anymore. It boils down to exactly the same thing.
\par \tab But as far as we know, the accusative was the only Quenya case that was lost among the Exiles. The remaining cases, in addition to the nominative, are the }{\i\lang3081 genitive}{\lang3081 , the }{\i\lang3081 possessive}{\lang3081 , the }{
\i\lang3081 dative}{\lang3081 , the }{\i\lang3081 allative}{\lang3081 , the }{\i\lang3081 ablative}{\lang3081 , the }{\i\lang3081 locative}{\lang3081 , and the }{\i\lang3081 instrumental}{\lang3081 
. (I should add that learning the form and function of the cases is more important than learning their Latin names.) There is also a mysterious case which Tolkien listed in the Plotz Letter, but without discussing its name or use \endash 
 so there is little I can say about it here.
\par \tab In Lessons 11-16, we will work our way through the list of Quenya cases, discussing their
 functions and how they are formed. Precisely because we have the blessed Plotz Letter, we are now on somewhat more solid ground than we usually find ourselves upon when discussing Quenya grammar. (Tolkien really should have sent Dick Plotz a list of pron
ouns and verb forms as well!)
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 THE GENITIVE}{\i\lang3081 
\par }{\lang3081 We will start our discussion of the Quenya cases with the few Quenya noun forms that actually have a direct English equivalent (sort of). Where Quenya has nine or ten noun cases, English has only two: nominative a
nd genitive. The nominative we have already discussed: In English as in Exilic Quenya, a noun appears in the nominative when it is the subject or the object of a noun. In both languages, the nominative singular may well be considered the simplest form of 
the noun. There is no special ending or other inflectional element to signal that "this is a nominative form"; rather it is the }{\i\lang3081 absence}{\lang3081  of any such element that tells us what case the noun appears in.
\par \tab All the other cases \endash  or in English, }{\i\lang3081 the}{\lang3081  one other case \endash  do display special endings, though. The one noun case of modern English, except for the nominative, is the }{\i\lang3081 genitive}{\lang3081 
. (Please notice the spelling; I am tired of seeing "genetive" on certain mailing lists.) In the singular, it is formed by adding the ending }{\i\lang3081 's}{\lang3081  to the noun, e.g. }{\i\lang3081 girl's}{\lang3081  from }{\i\lang3081 girl}{
\lang3081 . In the plural, this ending normally merges with the plural ending -}{\i\lang3081 s}{\lang3081 , but its theoretical presence is hinted at in writing by means of an apostrophe (}{\i\lang3081 girls'}{\lang3081  for **}{\i\lang3081 girls's}{
\lang3081 ...Gollum would have loved the latter form).
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
The grammatical function of this case ought to be familiar enough to anyone who is capable of reading this text; already in Lesson Two, we briefly touched on this "ownership form". As stated in my handy }{\i\lang3081 Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary 
of Current English}{\lang3081 , the genitive case is used to indicate "source or possession". In a combination like }{\i\lang3081 the girl's doll}{\lang3081 
, the genitive case is used to coordinate two nouns so as to indicate that the former is the owner or possessor of the latter. (This latter word which the genitive form connects with, like "doll" in our example, is sometimes said to be }{\i\lang3081 
governed by}{\lang3081  the genitive. Conversely, the genitive form itself may be said to be "dependent on" this other word; this is Tolkien's wording in UT:317.) The En
glish genitive does not necessarily connote "ownership" in the strictest sense, but may also be used to describe other kinds of "belonging", such as family relationships \endash  e.g. }{\i\lang3081 the }{\i\ul\lang3081 girl's}{\i\lang3081  mother}{
\lang3081 . As for the genitive suggesting }{\i\lang3081 source}{\lang3081 , we can think of such phrases as }{\i\lang3081 the }{\i\ul\lang3081 architect's}{\i\lang3081  drawings}{\lang3081 
 (the drawings made by the architect, not necessarily owned by him, but }{\i\lang3081 originating}{\lang3081  with him). The genitive noun may not even denote a sentient being, e.g. }{\i\ul\lang3081 Britain's}{\i\lang3081  finest artists}{\lang3081 
 (the finest artists coming from/living in Britain). The latter example may also be termed genitive of }{\i\lang3081 location}{\lang3081 ; Britain's finest artists are the finest artists located }{\i\lang3081 in Britain}{\lang3081 .
\par The noun a genitive form is dependent on may well be }{\i\lang3081 another}{\lang3081  genitive, which in turn refers to a third noun \endash  e.g. "
the queen's sister's house". In principle we can string up an infinite number of genitives ("the king's father's aunt's brother's dog's... [etc. etc.]) \endash 
 though it should not come as a great shock to anyone that people who care about style and legibility normally won't push this too far.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 \tab 
Somewhat like adjectives, genitives can be used both attributively and as predicates. All the examples above are examples of attributive genitives, directly teamed up with a noun which the genitive is then dependent on. A 
genitive would however function as a predicate in a sentence like }{\i\lang3081 the book is Peter's}{\lang3081 . But rather than using genitives as predicates, English often resorts to circumlocutions (like }{\i\lang3081 the book belongs to Peter}{
\lang3081 ).
\par \tab Quite often, English does not use a genitive, but instead employs a phrase involving a preposition \endash  predominantly }{\i\lang3081 of}{\lang3081 , e.g. }{\i\lang3081 the finest artists of Britain}{\lang3081  rather than }{\i\lang3081 
Britain's finest artists}{\lang3081 . In some contexts, "of"-constructions are actually preferred to genitives, e.g. }{\i\lang3081 the end of the road}{\lang3081  rather than }{\i\lang3081 the road's end}{\lang3081 .
\par \tab So what about Quenya? The functions of English genitives, as well as English "of"-constructions, are covered by }{\i\lang3081 two}{\lang3081 
 Quenya noun cases; we will discuss the other relevant case in the next lesson. The functions of the case normally referred
 to as the Quenya genitive are somewhat more limited than the functions of the English genitive. But first of all, let us discuss how the Quenya genitive is formed.
\par \tab The basic Quenya genitive ending is -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081 . Starting from nouns that should be well known to the student by now, we can derive genitives like }{\b\lang3081 arano}{\lang3081  "king's", }{\b\lang3081 t\'e1rio}{\lang3081 
 "queen's", }{\b\lang3081 vend\'ebo}{\lang3081  "maiden's". If the noun }{\i\lang3081 ends in -}{\b\i\lang3081 o}{\i\lang3081  already}{\lang3081 , the genitive ending normally becomes "invisible". In UT:8 we have }{\b\lang3081 ciryamo}{\lang3081 
 for "mariner's". This is our sole attestation of this noun, but there is no reason to doubt that its nominative form "mariner" is likewise }{\b\lang3081 ciryamo}{\lang3081  (this word is obviously derived from }{\b\lang3081 cirya}{\lang3081 
 "ship", and the masculine/personal ending -}{\b\lang3081 mo}{\lang3081  [WJ:400] is well attested elsewhere: hence }{\b\lang3081 cirya-mo}{\lang3081  = "ship-person"). A name like }{\b\lang3081 Ulmo}{\lang3081 
 could be both nominative "Ulmo" and genitive "Ulmo's"; the context must decide how the form is to be understood. (However, in the case of nouns in -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  that have special stem-forms in -}{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081 , like }{
\b\lang3081 curo}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 curu}{\lang3081 - "skillful device", we would probably see }{\b\lang3081 curuo}{\lang3081  as the genitive form.)}{\i\lang3081 
\par }{\lang3081 \tab Nouns ending in -}{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081  lose this vowel when the genitive ending -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  is added: Since Quenya phonology does not permit the combination }{\b\lang3081 ao}{\lang3081 , it is simplified to }{
\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081 . For instance, }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081  demonstrates that the genitive "Varda's" is }{\b\lang3081 Vardo}{\lang3081 , not **}{\b\lang3081 Vardao}{\lang3081 
. It follows, then, that a few otherwise distinct nouns coincide in the genitive; for instance, it would seem that }{\b\lang3081 anta}{\lang3081  "face" and }{\b\lang3081 anto}{\lang3081  "mouth" both have the genitive form }{\b\lang3081 anto}{\lang3081 
. The context must be taken into account to determine which noun is meant.
\par \tab In the }{\i\lang3081 plural}{\lang3081 , the genitive ending -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  is expanded to -}{\b\lang3081 on}{\lang3081  (as we shall see later, the plural marker -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 
 occurs in several of the Quenya case endings). This ending -}{\b\lang3081 on}{\lang3081  is added to the simplest (nominative) plural form of the noun, in -}{\b\lang3081 r}{\lang3081  or -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 . Hence an }{\b\lang3081 r}{\lang3081 
-plural like }{\b\lang3081 aldar}{\lang3081  "trees" has the genitive plural }{\b\lang3081 aldaron}{\lang3081  "trees', of trees" \endash  whereas an }{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 -plural like }{\b\lang3081 eleni}{\lang3081  "stars" has the genitive form }{
\b\lang3081 elenion}{\lang3081  "stars', of stars". (The normal stress rules still apply, so while }{\b\lang3081 eleni}{\lang3081  is accented on the first syllable, the stress must fall on -}{\i\lang3081 len}{\lang3081 - in the longer form }{\b\lang3081 
elenion}{\lang3081 .) Both of these examples are attested in LotR: }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081  has }{\b\lang3081 r\'e1mar aldaron}{\lang3081 
 for "wings of trees" (a poetic circumlocution for "leaves"), and Frodo speaking in tongues in Cirith Ungol referred to E\'e4rendil as }{\b\lang3081 ancalima elenion}{\lang3081 , "brightest of stars".
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 A prominent example of a genitive plural is the very title of the }{\b\lang3081 Silmarillion}{\lang3081 , formed from the nominative plural }{\b\lang3081 Silmarilli}{\lang3081 
 "Silmarils". This title makes good sense considering that it is properly only one half of a longer genitive phrase, found on the title page following the }{\i\lang3081 Ainulindal\'eb}{\lang3081  and the }{\i\lang3081 Valaquenta}{\lang3081 : }{
\b\lang3081 Quenta Silmarillion}{\lang3081 , "The History of the Silmarils". As is already evident, a Quenya genitive is often best rendered as an English }{\i\lang3081 of}{\lang3081 -construction, not as an English genitive with the ending -}{
\i\lang3081 's}{\lang3081  or -}{\i\lang3081 s'}{\lang3081 :  "Stars' brightest" or "the Silmarils' History" would not be good English.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 \tab As for }{\i\lang3081 dual}{\lang3081  genitive, Tolkien indicated that its ending is -}{\b\lang3081 to}{\lang3081 , combining the dual ending -}{\b\lang3081 t}{\lang3081 
 with the basic genitive ending -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081 . In the Plotz letter, Tolkien used the example }{\b\lang3081 ciryato}{\lang3081 , "of a couple of ships". There is one uncertainty here, not addressed in Plotz: Should the ending be -}{
\b\lang3081 to}{\lang3081  also in the case of nouns that have dual forms in -}{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081  rather than -}{\b\lang3081 t}{\lang3081 ? Or would the }{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081  simply replace }{\b\lang3081 t}{\lang3081 
 here, so that such nouns have dual genitives in -}{\b\lang3081 uo}{\lang3081  instead? Concretely: if the nominative "(the) Two Trees" is }{\b\lang3081 Aldu}{\lang3081 , should the genitive "of (the) Two Trees" be }{\b\lang3081 Alduto}{\lang3081  or }{
\b\lang3081 Alduo}{\lang3081 ? A form like }{\b\lang3081 Alduto}{\lang3081  would have a }{\i\lang3081 double}{\lang3081  dual marker, both }{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081  and }{\b\lang3081 t}{\lang3081 , but then attested }{\i\lang3081 plural}{\lang3081 
 genitives likewise include double plural markers (}{\b\lang3081 elen}{\b\ul\lang3081 i}{\b\lang3081 o}{\b\ul\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 alda}{\b\ul\lang3081 r}{\b\lang3081 o}{\b\ul\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 
). Even so, I am not ready to rule out the possibility that genitives in -}{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081  should have genitives in -}{\b\lang3081 uo}{\lang3081 , e.g. }{\b\lang3081 i cala Alduo}{\lang3081  for "the light of (the) Two Trees". But
 since published material allows no certain conclusions in this matter, I have simply avoided the problem in the exercises below.
\par 
\par The special "stem forms" of some nouns are relevant for the formation of genitives as well. From }{\b\lang3081 r\'e1}{\lang3081  (}{\b\lang3081 r\'e1v}{\lang3081 -) "lion" we would have the genitive }{\b\lang3081 r\'e1vo}{\lang3081  "lion's"; from }{
\b\lang3081 n\'eds}{\lang3081  (}{\b\lang3081 niss}{\lang3081 -) "woman" we would have }{\b\lang3081 nisso}{\lang3081  "woman's". The plural forms would be }{\b\lang3081 r\'e1vion}{\lang3081  "lions', of lions" and }{\b\lang3081 nission}{\lang3081 
 "women's, of women" \endash  cf. the nominative plurals }{\b\lang3081 r\'e1vi}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 nissi}{\lang3081 . I am not quite sure about the dual forms; perhaps we can have }{\b\lang3081 r\'e1veto}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 nisseto}{
\lang3081  (an -}{\b\lang3081 e}{\lang3081 - intruding before the ending -}{\b\lang3081 to}{\lang3081  so that impossible consonant clusters do not arise; see later lessons for attested examples of an extra -}{\b\lang3081 e}{\lang3081 
- being slipped in like this).
\par 
\par So far the formation of the genitive; now we must return to its }{\i\lang3081 function}{\lang3081 
. In English, the genitive very often indicates who owns what, as in "the man's house". Indeed this is the main function of the English genitive. However, the Quenya genitive case is }{\i\lang3081 not}{\lang3081  normally used to describe simple ownersh
ip of things. Tolkien expressly noted that properly, this case was "not [used] as a 'possessive', or adjectivally to describe qualities" (WJ:368).
\par \tab To understand its function it is often useful to bear in mind its ultimate derivation. Tolkien explained that "the source of the most used 'genitive' inflection of Quenya" was an ancient adverbial or "prepositional" element basically meaning }{
\i\lang3081 from}{\lang3081  or }{\i\lang3081 from among}{\lang3081 . According to WJ:368, it originally had the form }{\i\lang3081 HO}{\lang3081 , or as an element added to nouns, -}{\i\lang3081 h\'f4}{\lang3081 
. The latter was the direct source of the Quenya case ending -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  (plural -}{\b\lang3081 on}{\lang3081 ). But according to the }{\i\lang3081 Etymologies}{\lang3081 , Quenya also had a regular preposition }{\b\lang3081 ho}{
\lang3081  "from", and in WJ:368 Tolkien mentions }{\b\lang3081 h\'f3}{\lang3081 - "from, off" as a verbal prefix, e.g. in }{\b\lang3081 h\'f3tuli}{\lang3081 - "come away" or literally "from-come".
\par \tab Even the case ending -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  may occasionally express "from", the most basic meaning of the primitive element }{\i\lang3081 HO}{\lang3081 . In the prose }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081 , we have the line }{\b\lang3081 
Varda...ortan\'eb m\'e1ryat Oioloss\'eb}{\b\cf6\lang3081 o}{\lang3081 , "Varda...raised her hands }{\cf6\lang3081 from}{\lang3081  Oioloss\'eb
" (essentially the same in the version in LotR, but with a more complicated, "poetic" word order). The translation provided in LotR reads: "Varda...from Mount Everwhite has uplifted her hands" \endash  }{\b\lang3081 Oioloss\'eb}{\lang3081  "Ever-white
" being a name of Taniquetil, the great mountain of the Blessed Realm where Manw\'eb and Varda dwell.
\par \tab However, }{\b\lang3081 Oioloss\'ebo}{\lang3081  is our sole example of the Quenya genitive being used with such a meaning. (For "from", Quenya regularly uses another case \endash  the }{\i\lang3081 ablative}{\lang3081 
, to be discussed in a later lesson.) Normally, the ending -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081 
 is seen to have acquired other, more abstract meanings. Nonetheless, one important function of the Quenya genitive still clearly reflects the idea of something coming "from" something or someone else: The Quenya genitive can be used to describe the }{
\i\lang3081 source}{\lang3081 , }{\i\lang3081 origin}{\lang3081  or }{\i\lang3081 former possessor}{\lang3081  of something \endash  so-called "derivative genitives" (WJ:369). Tolkien explained that }{\b\lang3081 r\'f3ma Orom\'ebo}{\lang3081  "Orom\'eb
's horn" refers to a horn }{\i\lang3081 coming from}{\lang3081  Orom\'eb, not a horn that Orom\'eb still has, or still had at the time that is being considered (WJ:168). Likewise, }{\b\lang3081 lamb\'eb Eldaron}{\lang3081  could }{\i\lang3081 not}{
\lang3081  be used for "the language of the Eldar", for this would mean "the language coming from the Eldar"; Tolkien added that such a wording would only be vali
d "in a case where the whole language was adopted by another people" (WJ:368-369). In light of this, the genitive phrase }{\b\lang3081 Vardo tellumar}{\lang3081  "Varda's domes" in }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081 
 may not necessarily imply that the heavenly "domes" were somehow }{\i\lang3081 owned}{\lang3081  by Varda, but rather that she made them, that they }{\i\lang3081 originated}{\lang3081  with her.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 Tolkien also listed "from among" as one of the meanings of the primitive element }{\i\lang3081 HO}{\lang3081 , and this meaning is discernable in Quenya examples of }{\i\lang3081 
partitive genitive}{\lang3081 , the genitive indicating what something or someone is }{\i\lang3081 part}{\lang3081  of. In the phrase}{\b\lang3081  E\'e4rendil }{\b\ul\lang3081 Elenion}{\b\lang3081  Ancalima}{\lang3081  "E\'e4rendil brightest }{
\ul\lang3081 of stars}{\lang3081 " (Letters:385), the words }{\b\lang3081 elenion ancalima}{\lang3081  actually imply "the brightest one }{\i\lang3081 among}{\lang3081  the stars": After his mythical transformation, E\'e4
rendil carrying the Silmaril is himself one of the stars, as indicated by the chapter }{\i\lang3081 The Mirror of Galadriel}{\lang3081  in Volume One of LotR ("E\'e4rendil, the Evening Star, most beloved of the Elves, shone clear above...")
\par It seems that a partitive genitive can denote what something is part of in a wholly physical sense as well: In a phrase translated "the hands of the Powers", }{\i\lang3081 F\'edriel's Song}{\lang3081  uses the plural genitive }{\b\lang3081 Valion}{
\lang3081  for "of the Powers" (sc. "of the }{\b\lang3081 Valar}{\lang3081 " \endash  as indicated by the }{\i\lang3081 Etymologies}{\lang3081 , entry }{\i\lang3081 BAL}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 Vali}{\lang3081  is a valid alternative to }{\b\lang3081 
Valar}{\lang3081  as the plural form of }{\b\lang3081 Vala}{\lang3081 ). The hands of the Valar, whenever they are incarnated, are physically }{\i\lang3081 part}{\lang3081  of the Valar themselves. 
\par The relationship between a }{\i\lang3081 place}{\lang3081  and something }{\i\lang3081 located in that place}{\lang3081  can also be expressed by means of the genitive case (cf. our own example "Britain's finest artists"). }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{
\lang3081  has }{\b\lang3081 Calaciryo m\'edri}{\lang3081  for "Calacirya's jewels = the jewels of Calacirya" (}{\b\lang3081 Calacirya}{\lang3081  "Light-cleft" being a place in the Blessed Realm; notice that as in the case of }{\b\lang3081 Vardo}{
\lang3081  "Varda's", the genitive ending -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  swallows up the final -}{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081 ). Perhaps this can also be analyzed as a partitive genitive, if something located in a place is somehow considered a }{\i\lang3081 
part}{\lang3081  of that place. A more abstract, but perhaps basically similar construction is found in }{\i\lang3081 C\'edrion's Oath}{\lang3081 : }{\b\lang3081 Elenna\'b7n\'f3r\'ebo alcar}{\lang3081 
 "the glory of the land of Elenna" or literally "(the) Elenna-land's glory". If we don't perceive the }{\b\lang3081 alcar}{\lang3081  or glory as being somehow "located" in Elenna (= N\'famenor), we must think of it as emanating }{\i\lang3081 from}{
\lang3081  Elenna, so that the genitive denotes }{\i\lang3081 source}{\lang3081 . (See the next lesson concerning the comparable case }{\b\lang3081 alcar Orom\'ebo}{\lang3081 .)
\par }{\i\lang3081 Family relationships}{\lang3081  are denoted by the genitive case. In Treebeard's Greeting to Celeborn and Galadriel occurs the genitive phrase }{\b\lang3081 vanim\'e1lion nostari}{\lang3081 , "parents of beautiful children" (Letters:30
8) or more literally "begetters of fair ones" (SD:73) \endash  }{\b\lang3081 vanim\'e1li}{\lang3081  meaning "fair ones" (genitive pl. }{\b\lang3081 vanim\'e1lion}{\lang3081 ) and }{\b\lang3081 nostari}{\lang3081 
 meaning "begetters". One could also argue that this example shows that a noun denoting some kind of agent, and another noun denoting the one whom this agent does something }{\i\lang3081 to}{\lang3081 
, can be coordinated by means of the genitive case (the "fair ones" were }{\i\lang3081 begotten}{\lang3081  by the }{\i\lang3081 begetters}{\lang3081 
). Whatever the case, we have other examples of family relationships described by means of a genitive. In the }{\i\lang3081 Silmarillion}{\lang3081  Index, entry "Children of Il\'favatar", we learn that this is a translation of }{\b\lang3081 H\'edni Il
\'favataro}{\lang3081 . Since Il\'favatar ("All-father") is a title of God, this example is somewhat profound. This also goes for }{\b\lang3081 Amill\'eb Eruva liss\'ebo}{\lang3081  "Mother of divine grace", a phrase 
occurring in Tolkien's Quenya translation of the Litany of Loreto (VT44:12; this is }{\b\lang3081 Amill\'eb}{\lang3081  "Mother" + }{\b\lang3081 Eruva}{\lang3081  "divine, of God" + }{\b\lang3081 liss\'ebo}{\lang3081 , genitive of }{\b\lang3081 liss\'eb}{
\lang3081  "grace, sweetness"). However, the genitive case would certainly also be used in more trivial phrases like "the king's sons" (probably }{\b\lang3081 i arano yondor}{\lang3081 ). As long as the genitive case describes }{\i\lang3081 parents'}{
\lang3081  relationship to their offspring, we could analyze the constructions as derivative genitives, parents being the physical origin of their children. But in the example }{\b\lang3081 Indis i\'b7Ciryamo}{\lang3081 
 "the Mariner's Wife" (UT:8), the genitive unquestionably describes a family relationship and nothing else, since the "Mariner" is not in any way the source or origin of his wife.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 \tab Perhaps we can generalize even further and say that relationships between }{\i\lang3081 people}{\lang3081 
 can be described by the Quenya genitive case. In WJ:369, Tolkien indicated that the genitive would be used in such a phrase as }{\b\lang3081 Elw\'eb, Aran Sindaron}{\lang3081  "Elw\'eb
 [= Thingol], King of the Sindar [Grey-elves]". Here the relationship is that between a ruler and the ruled. The same construction could however be used with reference to the }{\i\lang3081 area}{\lang3081  that is ruled: "King of Lestan\'f3r\'eb
" would be }{\b\lang3081 Aran Lestan\'f3r\'ebo}{\lang3081  (Lestan\'f3r\'eb being the Quenya name of the land called }{\i\lang3081 Doriath}{\lang3081  in Sindarin). The genitive case may also refer to }{\i\lang3081 things}{\lang3081 
 that are ruled: In a booklet which accompanied an exhibition at the Marquette University Archives in September 1983, }{\i\lang3081 Catalogue of an Exhibit of the Manuscripts of JRRT}{\lang3081 
, Taum Santoski presented Tolkien's Quenya translation of the title "Lord of the Rings": }{\b\lang3081 Heru i Million}{\lang3081 , which is }{\b\lang3081 heru}{\lang3081  "lord" + }{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 
 "the" + what is probably the plural genitive of a noun }{\b\lang3081 mill\'eb}{\lang3081  "ring", not otherwise attested. In the LotR itself, the Quenya word for "ring" is given as }{\b\lang3081 corma}{\lang3081  instead, Frodo and Sam being hailed as }{
\b\lang3081 Cormacolindor}{\lang3081  or Ring-bearers (this word occurring in the Cormallen Praise). For "Lord of the Rings" we might therefore have expected }{\b\lang3081 Heru i Cormaron}{\lang3081 , but anyhow, the phrase }{\b\lang3081 Heru i Million}{
\lang3081  confirms that the genitive case can be used to describe the relationship between a ruler and the ruled (people, area or thing).
\par \tab One of the most abstract meanings the genitive case may take on is }{\i\lang3081 of}{\lang3081  = }{\i\lang3081 about}{\lang3081 , }{\i\lang3081 concerning}{\lang3081 , as in }{\b\lang3081 Quenta Silmarillion}{\lang3081 
 "the History of (= concerning) the Silmarils". Another attested example is }{\b\lang3081 quental\'eb Noldoron}{\lang3081 
 "the history of the Noldor" (VT39:16). It may well be that the genitive can be used in this sense also in connection with verbs like }{\b\lang3081 nyar}{\lang3081 - "tell, relate" or }{\b\lang3081 quet}{\lang3081 - "speak", e.g. }{\b\lang3081 
nyarnen i Eld}{\b\cf6\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  "I told }{\cf6\lang3081 about}{\lang3081  the Elf" or }{\b\lang3081 i Naucor quetir alt\'eb harmar}{\b\cf2\lang3081 on}{\lang3081  "the Dwarves speak }{\cf2\lang3081 of }{\lang3081 
great treasures". We lack attested examples, though.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 Sometimes the precise meaning of a genitive is difficult to clearly define. In the famous greeting }{\b\lang3081 elen s\'edla l\'famenn' }{\b\ul\lang3081 omentielvo}{\lang3081 
, "a star shines upon the hour }{\ul\lang3081 of our meeting}{\lang3081 " or literally "...}{\ul\lang3081 our meeting's}{\lang3081 
 hour", the genitive simply coordinates the nouns "meeting" and "hour" to indicate that the "meeting" took place in the "hour". In the phrase }{\b\lang3081 Heren Istarion}{\lang3081  "Order of Wizards" (UT:388), one may ask whether the genitive }{
\b\lang3081 Istarion}{\lang3081  "of Wizards" implies that the order was }{\i\lang3081 founded}{\lang3081  by wizards, that it }{\i\lang3081 belongs}{\lang3081  to wizards, that it is }{\i\lang3081 made up}{\lang3081  of wizards, that it }{\i\lang3081 
organizes}{\lang3081  or }{\i\lang3081 controls}{\lang3081  (or even }{\i\lang3081 is controlled by}{\lang3081 ) wizards, etc. In all likelihood, several or all of these shades of meaning could be involved at the same time.
\par Also consider this passage from LotR, in the chapter }{\i\lang3081 The Houses of Healing}{\lang3081  in the third volume:
\par 
\par }\pard \li708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 Thereupon the herb-master entered. 'Your lordship asked for }{\i\lang3081 kingsfoil}{\lang3081 , as the rustics name it,' he said, 'or }{\i\lang3081 athelas}{\lang3081 
 in the noble tongue, or to those who know somewhat of the Valinorean...'
\par \tab 'I do so,' said Aragorn, 'and I care not whether you say now }{\i\lang3081 as\'eba aranion}{\lang3081  or }{\i\lang3081 kingsfoil}{\lang3081 , so long as you have some.'
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
\par So }{\b\lang3081 as\'eba aranion}{\lang3081  is the Quenya (or "Valinorean") for "kingsfoil", the herb called }{\i\lang3081 athelas}{\lang3081  in Sindarin. The word }{\b\lang3081 as\'eba}{\lang3081 
 refers to some kind of helpful or beneficial plant, but what precise meaning does the genitive plural }{\b\lang3081 aranion}{\lang3081  "of kings" express here? The kings didn't }{\i\lang3081 own}{\lang3081  or }{\i\lang3081 originate}{\lang3081 
 the kingsfoil; it was merely }{\i\lang3081 used}{\lang3081  by them for healing purposes. Unless this is comparable to a }{\b\lang3081 Calaciryo m\'edri}{\lang3081 
-construction because the kingsfoil was physically with the kings when they used it for healing ("life to the dying / In the king's hand lying!"), we must conclude that t
he genitive can also be used to indicate rather ill-defined states of "belonging", or mere association.
\par \tab Finally I may mention a function of the genitive that was unknown till early 2002, when I had already completed the first version of this course: It turns out that the phrase "full of [something]" is rendered as }{\b\lang3081 quanta}{\lang3081 
 "full" + a noun in the genitive case. Our attested example is somewhat profound: In his Quenya translation of the Hail Mary, first published in }{\i\lang3081 Tyali\'eb Tyelelli\'e9va}{\lang3081  #18, Tolkien rendered the phrase "full of grace" as }{
\b\lang3081 quanta Eruanno}{\lang3081 . This seems to mean, literally, "full of God-gift" (since }{\b\lang3081 Eruanno}{\lang3081  is most likely the genitive form of }{\b\lang3081 Eruanna}{\lang3081 , cf. }{\b\lang3081 anna}{\lang3081 
 "gift"). The same construction would presumably be used in a more trivial context, so that "full of water" can be rendered }{\b\lang3081 quanta neno}{\lang3081  (the noun "water" being }{\b\lang3081 n\'e9n}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 nen}{\lang3081 -).

\par \tab We have no attested example of a Quenya genitive form functioning as the }{\i\lang3081 predicate}{\lang3081  of a sentence \endash  but neither is there any particular reason to doubt that (say) "the ring is Sauron's" could be rendered }{\b\lang3081 
i corma n\'e1 Saurondo}{\lang3081 . (The name }{\b\lang3081 Sauron}{\lang3081  probably has the stem-form }{\b\lang3081 Saurond}{\lang3081 -, given the derivation Tolkien indicated in Letters:380.)
\par 
\par }{\i\lang3081 Word order:}{\lang3081  In the prose version of }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081 , Tolkien placed a genitive in }{\i\lang3081 front}{\lang3081  of the noun it is dependent }{\cf1\lang3081 on: }{\b\ul\cf1\lang3081 Aldaron}{
\b\cf1\lang3081  r\'e1mar}{\cf1\lang3081  = literally "}{\ul\cf1\lang3081 trees'}{\cf1\lang3081  wings", }{\b\ul\cf1\lang3081 \'f3maryo}{\b\cf1\lang3081  l\'edrinen}{\cf1\lang3081  = literally "in }{\ul\cf1\lang3081 her voice's}{\cf1\lang3081  song", }{
\b\ul\cf1\lang3081 Calaciryo}{\b\cf1\lang3081  m\'edri}{\cf1\lang3081  = literally "}{\ul\cf1\lang3081 Calacirya's}{\cf1\lang3081  jewels" \endash  cf. the interlinear translation in RGEO:66-67. (It should be noted that }{\b\cf1\lang3081 aldaron r\'e1mar}
{\cf1\lang3081  was altered from }{\b\cf1\lang3081 r\'e1mar aldaron}{\cf1\lang3081  in the "poetic" version in LotR.) Above the entire "prose" version, Tolkien also placed the superscript }{\b\ul\cf1\lang3081 Altariello}{\b\cf1\lang3081  naini\'eb}{
\cf1\lang3081 , "}{\ul\cf1\lang3081 Altariel's}{\cf1\lang3081  (= Galadriel's) lament". }{\i\cf1\lang3081 Cirion's Oath}{\cf1\lang3081  displays the same word order: }{\b\ul\lang3081 N\'f3r\'ebo}{\b\lang3081  alcar}{\lang3081  "the glory }{\ul\lang3081 
of the land}{\lang3081 " or literally "}{\ul\lang3081 (the) land's}{\lang3081  glory", }{\b\ul\lang3081 Elendil vorondo}{\b\lang3081  voronw\'eb}{\lang3081  "the faith }{\ul\lang3081 of Elendil the Faithful}{\lang3081 " or literally "}{\ul\lang3081 
Elendil (the) Faithful's}{\lang3081  faith" (the genitive ending being attached to the }{\i\lang3081 last}{\lang3081  word in the phrase }{\b\lang3081 Elendil voronda}{\lang3081  "Elendil [the] Faithful"; as usual, the ending displaces a final -}{
\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081 ). In LotR we also have }{\b\ul\lang3081 elenion}{\b\lang3081  ancalima}{\lang3081  for "}{\ul\lang3081 stars'}{\lang3081 
 brightest [one]" = "the brightest [one] of [the] stars". So in normal prose, should the genitive always precede, just like the English genitive in }{\i\lang3081 's}{\lang3081 ? 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 Not necessarily, it would seem.}{\cf1\lang3081  Most attested Quenya genitives }{\i\cf1\lang3081 follow}{\cf1\lang3081  the noun they are dependent on, with the same word order as an English }{
\i\cf1\lang3081 of}{\cf1\lang3081 -construction. In the case of most of these attestations, we have no reason to suppose that the word order is particularly "poetic": }{\b\cf1\lang3081 Quenta }{\b\ul\cf1\lang3081 Silmarillion}{\cf1\lang3081  "History }{
\ul\cf1\lang3081 of the Silmarils"}{\cf1\lang3081 , }{\b\cf1\lang3081 Heru }{\b\ul\cf1\lang3081 i Million}{\cf1\lang3081  "Lord }{\ul\cf1\lang3081 of the Rings}{\cf1\lang3081 ", }{\b\cf1\lang3081 l\'famenn' }{\b\ul\cf1\lang3081 omentielvo}{\cf1\lang3081 
 "on the hour }{\ul\cf1\lang3081 of our meeting}{\cf1\lang3081 ", }{\b\cf1\lang3081 as\'eba }{\b\ul\cf1\lang3081 aranion}{\cf1\lang3081  "}{\i\cf1\lang3081 as\'eba}{\cf1\lang3081  [helpful plant] }{\ul\cf1\lang3081 of kings}{\cf1\lang3081 
" (kingsfoil; the two latter examples are from LotR), }{\b\cf1\lang3081 H\'edni }{\b\ul\cf1\lang3081 Il\'favataro}{\cf1\lang3081  "Children of }{\ul\cf1\lang3081 Il\'favatar}{\cf1\lang3081 " (}{\i\cf1\lang3081 Silmarillion}{\cf1\lang3081  Index), }{
\b\cf1\lang3081 mannar }{\b\ul\cf1\lang3081 Valion}{\cf1\lang3081  "into the hands }{\ul\cf1\lang3081 of the Powers}{\cf1\lang3081 " (}{\i\cf1\lang3081 F\'edriel's Song}{\cf1\lang3081 ), }{\b\lang3081 Heren }{\b\ul\lang3081 Istarion}{\lang3081  "Order }{
\ul\lang3081 of Wizards}{\lang3081 " (UT:388), }{\b\lang3081 Pel\'f3ri }{\b\ul\lang3081 Valion}{\lang3081  "Fencing Heights }{\ul\lang3081 of the Vali}{\lang3081  [Valar]" (MR:18), }{\b\cf1\lang3081 aran }{\b\ul\cf1\lang3081 Sindaron}{\cf1\lang3081 
 "King }{\ul\cf1\lang3081 of the Sindar}{\cf1\lang3081 " (WJ:369), }{\b\cf1\lang3081 Aran }{\b\ul\cf1\lang3081 Lestan\'f3r\'ebo}{\cf1\lang3081  "King }{\ul\cf1\lang3081 of Doriath}{\cf1\lang3081 " (}{\i\cf1\lang3081 ibid.}{\cf1\lang3081 ), }{
\b\cf1\lang3081 i equessi }{\b\ul\cf1\lang3081 R\'familo}{\cf1\lang3081  "the sayings }{\ul\cf1\lang3081 of R\'famil}{\cf1\lang3081 " (WJ:398), }{\b\cf1\lang3081 lamb\'eb }{\b\ul\cf1\lang3081 Eldaron}{\cf1\lang3081  or }{\b\cf1\lang3081 lamb\'eb }{
\b\ul\cf1\lang3081 Quendion}{\cf1\lang3081  "the language }{\ul\cf1\lang3081 of the Elves}{\cf1\lang3081 " (WJ:368/PM:395), }{\b\cf1\lang3081 Rithil-}{\b\ul\cf1\lang3081 Anamo}{\cf1\lang3081  "Ring }{\ul\cf1\lang3081 of Doom}{\cf1\lang3081 
" (WJ:401). Where Tolkien rendered such a Quenya construction by employing an English genitive in -}{\i\cf1\lang3081 's}{\cf1\lang3081 , he must of necessity reverse the original word order: }{\b\lang3081 Indis i\'b7}{\b\ul\lang3081 Ciryamo}{\lang3081 
 "The }{\ul\lang3081 Mariner's}{\lang3081  Wife" (UT:8).
\par One potential misunderstanding may be mentioned here: Occasionally people are seen to be completely seduced by English }{\i\lang3081 of}{\lang3081 -constructions, thinking that the genitive ending -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081 
 should appear at the same place in the phrase as the English preposition }{\i\lang3081 of}{\lang3081  does. Therefore they end up }{\i\lang3081 attaching the genitive ending to the wrong word}{\lang3081  in an hopeless attempt to copy
 the English order of all the elements in the phrase. Ask ten people to translate "the glory }{\ul\lang3081 of}{\lang3081  Aman" into a Quenya genitive phrase, and it is a good bet that several of them will come up with something like }{\b\lang3081 
i alcar}{\b\ul\lang3081 o}{\b\lang3081  Aman}{\lang3081 , which actually means "the glory's Aman" or "Aman of the glory"! What we want is either }{\b\lang3081 Amano alcar}{\lang3081  (think "Aman's glory") or (}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 ) }{\b\lang3081 
alcar Amano}{\lang3081 .
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
\par As for the word order employed when a }{\i\lang3081 preposition}{\lang3081  is used in conjunction with a genitive phrase, the prose }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081  provides the strange example }{\b\lang3081 Vardo nu luini tellumar}{\lang3081 
. Tolkien translated this as "under Varda's blue domes". As we see, the Quenya wording is literally "Varda's under blue domes", the preposition }{\i\lang3081 following}{\lang3081  the genitive noun \endash 
 a most unexpected order, especially considering that this is supposed to be normal prose. Yet the prose }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081  also has }{\b\lang3081 ve aldaron r\'e1mar}{\lang3081 
 for "like the wings of trees" (or literally "like trees' wings"). Here the word order is exactly what we would expect, namely preposition + genitive + the noun it governs (not **}{\b\lang3081 aldaron ve r\'e1mar}{\lang3081 
 or whatever!) It is almost tempting to assume that }{\b\lang3081 Vardo nu luini tellumar}{\lang3081  is simply an error for ?}{\b\lang3081 nu Vardo luini tellumar}{\lang3081 
. At this stage at least, I would always use the "English-style" word-order exemplified by the phrase }{\b\lang3081 ve aldaron r\'e1mar}{\lang3081 . Perhaps }{\b\lang3081 Vardo nu luini tellumar}{\lang3081 
 is an example of the exceedingly esoteric syntax preferred by the Eldar, whose thoughts are not like those of Mortal Men...or perhaps it is just a typo. We must await the publication of more material.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\lang3081 The use of the article:}{\lang3081  A genitive determines the noun it is dependent upon, just like the definite article does: }{\b\lang3081 Indis i\'b7Ciryamo}{\lang3081 
 does mean "the Mariner's Wife" = "the Wife of the Mariner". It cannot be interpreted "}{\i\lang3081 a}{\lang3081  wife of the mariner" in an indefinite or undetermined sense, even though the definite article }{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 
 is missing before the noun }{\b\lang3081 indis}{\lang3081  "wife, bride". Same with }{\b\lang3081 lamb\'eb Quendion}{\lang3081  "}{\i\lang3081 the}{\lang3081  language of the Elves" (PM:395, emphasis added); this cannot be interpreted "}{\i\lang3081 a}{
\lang3081  language of the Elves", for }{\b\lang3081 lamb\'eb}{\lang3081  is determined by the genitive }{\b\lang3081 Quendion}{\lang3081 . Cf. English "the Elves' language" = "the [not }{\i\lang3081 a}{\lang3081 
] language of the Elves", even though there is no "the" before "language" in a phrase like "the Elves' language".  One must understand that while the first noun of an English }{\i\lang3081 of}{\lang3081 -construction may
 or may not be definite and accordingly receives the appropriate article (}{\i\lang3081 the}{\lang3081  or }{\i\lang3081 a}{\lang3081 ), a Quenya noun connecting with a following genitive is always determined, whether or not the article }{\b\lang3081 i}{
\lang3081  is used. The system is actually the same as in English, with one minor complication added: whereas an English genitive always }{\i\lang3081 precedes}{\lang3081  the noun it is dependent on, a Quenya genitive may come }{\i\lang3081 after}{
\lang3081  this noun as well. The latter word order inevitably makes one think of English }{\i\lang3081 of}{\lang3081 -constructions, but they are strictly not comparable as far as grammar is concerned \endash 
 even though Quenya genitive phrases are often best rendered as English }{\i\lang3081 of}{\lang3081 -constructions.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 Where the genitive }{\i\lang3081 follows}{\lang3081  the noun it is dependent upon, the use of the definite article before this noun is apparently optiona
l. The noun is definite anyway, so including the article is in a way superfluous; yet we have the examples }{\b\ul\lang3081 i}{\b\lang3081  arani Eldaron}{\lang3081  "}{\ul\lang3081 the}{\lang3081  kings of the Eldar" (WJ:369) and }{\b\ul\lang3081 i}{
\b\lang3081  equessi R\'familo}{\lang3081  "}{\ul\lang3081 the}{\lang3081  sayings of R\'famil" (WJ:398). }{\b\lang3081 Equessi R\'familo}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 arani Eldaron}{\lang3081  without the art
icle would have meant precisely the same thing. Conversely, the phrase }{\b\lang3081 indis i ciryamo}{\lang3081  "the mariner's wife" could presumably have been expanded to read }{\b\ul\lang3081 i}{\b\lang3081  indis i ciryamo}{\lang3081  "}{\ul\lang3081 
the}{\lang3081  wife of the mariner", again without altering the meaning.
\par No attested example of a }{\i\lang3081 preceding}{\lang3081  genitive is followed by an article. But if we can choose freely between }{\b\lang3081 i equessi R\'familo}{\lang3081  and just }{\b\lang3081 equessi R\'familo}{\lang3081 
, perhaps this principle would still apply if the genitive is moved to the beginning of the phrase? }{\b\lang3081 R\'familo equessi}{\lang3081  "R\'famil's sayings" is certainly a valid wording, but what about }{\b\lang3081 R\'familo i equessi}{\lang3081 
? Would this be equally possible, or would it sound just as weird as "R\'famil's the sayings" in English? I, for one, would avoid this uncertain and unattested construction.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
\par A few prepositions govern the genitive case. It is said that }{\b\lang3081 \'fa}{\lang3081  "without" is normally followed by genitive, Tolkien mentioning the example }{\b\lang3081 \'fa calo}{\lang3081  "without light" (VT39:14). This }{\b\lang3081 calo}{
\lang3081  would seem to be the genitive form of a noun }{\b\lang3081 cala}{\lang3081  "light" (as in }{\b\lang3081 Calaquendi}{\lang3081  "Light-elves" or }{\b\lang3081 Calacirya}{\lang3081  "Light-cleft").
\par 
\par }{\i\cf2\lang3081 Summary of Lesson Eleven:}{\lang3081  The Quenya noun is inflected for a number of }{\i\lang3081 cases}{\lang3081 , special noun-forms which clarify what function a noun has in a sentence. The forms so far discussed are examples of the }
{\i\lang3081 nominative}{\lang3081  case, used when a noun is the subject or the object of a sentence (a distinct "object" case, the }{\i\lang3081 accusative}{\lang3081 , had formerly occurred but fell out of use in Exilic Quenya). The Quenya }{
\i\lang3081 genitive}{\lang3081  case has the ending -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  (displacing a final -}{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081 , where such is present); the plural form is -}{\b\lang3081 on}{\lang3081 
 (added to the nominative plural), whereas dual genitives receive the ending -}{\b\lang3081 to}{\lang3081  (but nouns with nominative dual forms in -}{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081  would possibly have genitive duals in -}{\b\lang3081 uo}{\lang3081 
 rather than -}{\b\lang3081 uto}{\lang3081 ). The noun governed by the genitive can come either before or after it; }{\b\lang3081 R\'familo equessi}{\lang3081  and (}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 ) }{\b\lang3081 equessi R\'familo}{\lang3081 
 would work equally well for "R\'famil's sayings/the sayings of R\'famil". The Quenya genitive properly indicates source or origin (including }{\i\lang3081 former}{\lang3081  possessors), but also covers most relationships be
tween people (like family relationships), as well as the relationship between a ruler and the ruled (people or territory). "X}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  Y" or "Y X}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081 
"  may also imply "Y of X" in the sense of Y being a physical part of X, or (if X is a plural word) Y being one of X. Thus E\'e4rendil is said to be }{\b\lang3081 eleni}{\b\ul\lang3081 on}{\b\lang3081  ancalima}{\lang3081  "star}{\ul\lang3081 s'}{
\lang3081  brightest" = "the brightest one of (/among) stars". The relationship between a place and something located in that place may also be expressed by means of a genitive: }{\b\lang3081 Calaciryo m\'edri}{\lang3081  "the jewels of Calaci
rya". A genitive can also express "of = about, concerning", as in }{\b\lang3081 Quenta Silmarilli}{\b\ul\lang3081 on}{\lang3081  "the History }{\ul\lang3081 of}{\lang3081  the Silmarils". Furthermore, the preposition }{\b\lang3081 \'fa}{\lang3081 
 "without" normally takes the genitive case.
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 VOCABULARY
\par }{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 cainen}{\lang3081  "ten"
\par }{\b\lang3081 laman}{\lang3081  (}{\b\lang3081 lamn}{\lang3081 -) "animal" }{\fs20\lang3081 (the stem-form may also simply be }{\b\fs20\lang3081 laman}{\fs20\lang3081 -, but we will use }{\b\fs20\lang3081 lamn}{\fs20\lang3081 - here)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 yulma}{\lang3081  "cup"
\par }{\b\lang3081 limp\'eb}{\lang3081  "wine" }{\fs20\lang3081 (within Tolkien's mythos, }{\b\fs20\lang3081 limp\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  was some special drink of the Elves or of the Valar \endash  but in the }{\i\fs20\lang3081 Etymologies}{\fs20\lang3081 
, entry }{\i\fs20\lang3081 LIP}{\fs20\lang3081 , Tolkien also provided the parenthetical gloss "wine", and we will use the word in that sense here)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 rass\'eb}{\lang3081  "horn" }{\fs20\lang3081 ("especially on living animal, but also applied to mountains" \endash  Etym., entry }{\i\fs20\lang3081 RAS}{\fs20\lang3081 )}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 toron}{\lang3081  (}{\b\lang3081 torn}{\lang3081 -) "brother"
\par }{\b\lang3081 Menel}{\lang3081  "the firmament, sky, heaven, the heavens" }{\fs20\lang3081 (but the Quenya word is singular. It is apparently not used in a religious sense, but refers to the physical heavens only. Cf. }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Meneltarma}{
\fs20\lang3081  "Pillar of Heaven" as the name of the central mountain in N\'famenor. The word }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Menel}{\fs20\lang3081  is capitalized and apparently treated as a proper name, hence not requiring any article.)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 ulya}{\lang3081 - "to pour" (transitive past tense }{\b\lang3081 ulyan\'eb}{\lang3081 , intransitive }{\b\lang3081 ull\'eb}{\lang3081 ) 
\par }{\b\lang3081 s\'edr\'eb}{\lang3081  "river"
\par }{\b\lang3081 cilya}{\lang3081  "cleft, gorge" }{\fs20\lang3081 (also }{\b\fs20\lang3081 cirya}{\fs20\lang3081 , as in }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Calacirya}{\fs20\lang3081  "Pass of Light" or "Light-cleft", which name actually appears as }{\b\fs20\lang3081 
Calacilya}{\fs20\lang3081  in some texts \endash  but since }{\b\fs20\lang3081 cirya}{\fs20\lang3081  also means "ship", we will use }{\b\fs20\lang3081 cilya}{\fs20\lang3081  here)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 anto}{\lang3081  "mouth" }{\fs20\lang3081 (possibly representing earlier }{\i\fs20\lang3081 amat\'f4}{\fs20\lang3081 , }{\i\fs20\lang3081 amto}{\fs20\lang3081 ; if so it likely comes from the same root as the verb }{\b\fs20\lang3081 mat}{
\fs20\lang3081 - "to eat")}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 \'fa}{\lang3081  preposition "without" }{\fs20\lang3081 (normally followed by genitive)}{\lang3081 
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 EXERCISES
\par }{\lang3081 
\par 1. Translate into English:
\par 
\par }{\i\lang3081 A}{\lang3081 . }{\b\lang3081 Hirnent\'eb i firin ohtaro macil.
\par }{\i\lang3081 B.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Menelo eleni s\'edlar.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 C.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Tirnen i nisso hendu.}{\i\lang3081 
\par D.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Cenuvant\'eb Aran Atanion ar ily\'eb n\'f3rion.
\par }{\i\lang3081 E.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Coa \'fa talamion um\'eb anwa coa.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 F.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 I t\'e1rio \'fami\'eb torni merir tur\'eb Ambaro lier.
\par }{\i\lang3081 G.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 I rassi i lamnion nar alt\'eb.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 H. }{\b\lang3081 I cainen r\'e1vi lintav\'eb manter i rocco hr\'e1v\'eb.
\par }{\lang3081 
\par 2. Translate into Quenya:
\par 
\par }{\i\lang3081 I.}{\lang3081  The birds of heaven will see ten warriors between the great rivers.
\par }{\i\lang3081 J.}{\lang3081  The king's thrall poured wine into the biggest of the cups. }{\i\fs20\lang3081 ("Biggest, greatest" = }{\b\i\fs20\lang3081 analta}{\i\fs20\lang3081 . Time to repeat Lesson Five, where we discussed superlatives?)}{\lang3081 

\par }{\i\lang3081 K. }{\lang3081 The Elf's brother gathered (together) the ten books about stars.
\par }{\i\lang3081 L}{\lang3081 . The great river of the land poured into a gorge.
\par }{\i\lang3081 M}{\lang3081 . A man without a mouth cannot speak.
\par }{\i\lang3081 N.}{\lang3081  I have seen the greatest of all mountains under the sky.
\par }{\i\lang3081 O}{\lang3081 . I want to find a land without great animals like lions.
\par }{\i\lang3081 P.}{\lang3081  You will see an animal without horns }{\i\fs20\lang3081 (dual: a couple of horns)
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs36\cf6\lang3081 LESSON TWELVE}{\b\fs32\lang3081 
\par The Possessive-Adjectival case. Verbal or Abstract nouns and how they interact with the Genitive and Possessive cases.
\par }{\lang3081 
\par This lesson is mainly devoted to a case that by its function in many ways complements the genitive case. But first of all, let me say that there is no easy answer to the question of what this cas
e should be called. Tolkien listed it in the Plotz Letter, but he did not name it. The case in -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  or -}{\b\lang3081 on}{\lang3081 
 that we discussed in the previous lesson is referred to simply as the "genitive" in several sources. But in WJ:369, Tolkien refers to the forms in -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081 (}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 
) as "partitive-derivative genitives", whereas the other case that we will now discuss is called a "possessive-adjectival [genitive]". On the previous page, he noted regarding the case with the ending -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081 (}{\b\lang3081 n}{
\lang3081 ) that "properly it was used partitively, or to describe the source or origin, }{\i\lang3081 not as a 'possessive'}{\lang3081 " (emphasis added). The context indicates that the other case that he went on to describe }{\i\lang3081 is}{\lang3081 
 used as a "possessive". So simply to have some suitable designation of this case, I shall adopt the word }{\i\lang3081 possessive}{\lang3081  as its name. (Another plausible term is "adjectival case", which is also used by some students.)
\par }{\fs20\lang3081 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 THE POSSESSIVE}{\b\lang3081 
\par }{\lang3081 By its function, this case \endash  rather than the case in -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081 (}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 ) which Tolkien normally terms the "genitive" when discussing Quenya grammar \endash  corre
sponds much better to the English genitive in -'}{\i\lang3081 s}{\lang3081 . Even so, in certain contexts this case is also best translated using English }{\i\lang3081 of}{\lang3081 -constructions.
\par \tab The possessive case is formed by adding the ending -}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081 , e.g. }{\b\lang3081 Eldava}{\lang3081  as the possessive form of }{\b\lang3081 Elda}{\lang3081 . When it i
s to be added to a noun that ends in a consonant, this ending probably takes the form -}{\b\lang3081 wa}{\lang3081  instead. The assumption that the ending -}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081  appears in the variant form -}{\b\lang3081 wa}{\lang3081 
 after consonants is supported by this fact: The suffix -}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081  is in origin a mere adjectival ending, found in some common adjectives as well, and in such cases it is seen to appear as -}{\b\lang3081 wa}{\lang3081 
 following a consonant \endash  e.g. }{\b\lang3081 anwa}{\lang3081  "real, actual, true" or }{\b\lang3081 helwa}{\lang3081  "pale blue". In Primitive Elvish, the ending had the form -}{\i\lang3081 w\'e2}{\lang3081 , but in Quenya, }{\i\lang3081 w}{
\lang3081  normally became }{\b\lang3081 v}{\lang3081  when intervocalic (= occurring between vowels). Cf. another common adjective displaying this ending, }{\b\lang3081 tereva}{\lang3081  "fine, acute", which word Tolkien noted had been }{\i\lang3081 ter
\'eaw\'e2}{\lang3081  in Primitive Elvish (see Etym, entry }{\i\lang3081 TER}{\lang3081 , }{\i\lang3081 TERES}{\lang3081 ). Since most Quenya nouns end in a vowel, the }{\i\lang3081 w}{\lang3081  of -}{\i\lang3081 w\'e2}{\lang3081 
 typically became intervocalic when this ending was added, and therefore it normally turned into }{\b\lang3081 v}{\lang3081  (e.g. }{\i\lang3081 Eld\'e2-w\'e2}{\lang3081 , }{\i\lang3081 Eldaw\'e2}{\lang3081  becoming }{\b\lang3081 Eldava}{\lang3081 
, just like }{\i\lang3081 ter\'eaw\'e2}{\lang3081  became }{\b\lang3081 tereva}{\lang3081 ). But if we combine this ending with a noun ending in a consonant, e.g. }{\b\lang3081 atar}{\lang3081  "father" (unchanged since Primitive Elvish), }{\i\lang3081 
atar-w\'e2}{\lang3081  would presumably produce Quenya }{\b\lang3081 atarwa}{\lang3081 , original }{\i\lang3081 w}{\lang3081  remaining }{\b\lang3081 w}{\lang3081  because it is not here intervocalic. 
\par \tab The Plotz Letter lists no }{\i\lang3081 dual}{\lang3081  forms of the possessive case, but I can't imagine why such forms shou
ld not exist. Even so, I won't construct any exercises involving these slightly hypothetical forms, but presumably the simple suffix -}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081  would be used after a dual form in -}{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081  \endash  e.g. }{\b\lang3081 
Alduva}{\lang3081  as the possessive form of }{\b\lang3081 Aldu}{\lang3081  "Two Trees". The more frequent dual forms in -}{\b\lang3081 t}{\lang3081  would likely have possessive forms in -}{\b\lang3081 twa}{\lang3081 , a dual like }{\b\lang3081 ciryat}{
\lang3081  "a couple of ships" becoming }{\b\lang3081 ciryatwa}{\lang3081  (accented on the second-to-last syllable because of the consonant cluster }{\b\lang3081 tw}{\lang3081 ).
\par \tab Just like the Plotz Letter lists no dual form of the possessive case, Tolkien mentioned no }{\i\lang3081 plural}{\lang3081  form either \endash 
 which fact led some investigators to conclude that this case has no plural at all! But other material does indicate that such a form exists (suggesting that we can also feel free to extrapolate a dual form a
s we tried to do above: the Plotz Letter does not necessarily include everything). In WJ:368 Tolkien indicates that the possessive has a plural form in -}{\b\lang3081 iva}{\lang3081 , combining the simple ending -}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081 
 with the plural marker -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 . In this case, this ending is used even if the possessive suffix is added to words that would normally have nominative plurals in -}{\b\lang3081 r}{\lang3081 , like }{\b\lang3081 Eldar}{\lang3081 
: The plural possessive is }{\i\lang3081 not}{\lang3081  **}{\b\lang3081 Eldarva}{\lang3081  or **}{\b\lang3081 Eldarwa}{\lang3081  or whatever, but }{\b\lang3081 Eldaiva}{\lang3081 , attested in the phrase }{\b\lang3081 lamb\'eb Eldaiva}{\lang3081 
 "language of the Eldar" (WJ:369). The plural form -}{\b\lang3081 iva}{\lang3081  is said to be an innovation in Quenya, not a form inherited from older stages of Elvish.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 When the initial vowel of the ending -}{\b\lang3081 iva}{\lang3081  merges with the last vowel of the noun to produce a diphthong, like }{\b\lang3081 ai}{\lang3081  in }{\b\lang3081 Elda}{
\lang3081  + }{\b\lang3081 iva}{\lang3081  = }{\b\lang3081 Eld}{\b\ul\lang3081 ai}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081 , this diphthong of course receives the stress (}{\i\lang3081 eld-AI-va}{\lang3081 ). Most nouns in -}{\b\lang3081 \'eb}{\lang3081 
 would at an older stage have behaved in a similar way, a diphthong }{\i\lang3081 ei}{\lang3081  arising; the plural possessive of }{\b\lang3081 lass\'eb}{\lang3081  "leaf" may at one point have been }{\i\lang3081 lasseiva}{\lang3081  (for even older ?}{
\i\lang3081 lasseiw\'e2}{\lang3081 , if such a form was ever in use). But the diphthong }{\i\lang3081 ei}{\lang3081  eventually became long }{\b\lang3081 \'ed}{\lang3081  in Quenya, so perhaps the current form was }{\b\lang3081 lass\'edva}{\lang3081  
\endash  with a long }{\b\lang3081 \'ed}{\lang3081  still attracting the stress. In the Plotz Letter, such a long }{\b\lang3081 \'ed}{\lang3081  is observed in the plural form of another case: }{\b\lang3081 lass\'ednen}{\lang3081  as the plural }{
\i\lang3081 instrumental}{\lang3081 , to be discussed in a later lesson. (The form }{\b\lang3081 lass\'edva}{\lang3081  is of course not confirmed by Plotz, since no plural forms of the possessive case are there discussed, but the form }{\b\lang3081 lass
\'ednen}{\lang3081  seems to confirm the general principle: This form is in all likelihood meant to represent older }{\i\lang3081 lasseinen}{\lang3081 , and then older }{\i\lang3081 lasseiva}{\lang3081  ought to produce Quenya }{\b\lang3081 lass\'edva}{
\lang3081 .)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 \tab It is not quite clear what would happen when the ending -}{\b\lang3081 iva}{\lang3081  is added to a noun already ending in -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 , like }{\b\lang3081 t\'e1ri}{\lang3081 
 "queen", or a noun with a stem-form in -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 , like }{\b\lang3081 l\'f3m\'eb}{\lang3081  (}{\b\lang3081 l\'f3mi}{\lang3081 -) "night" (SD:415). Possibly the two }{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 's would merge into a long }{\b\lang3081 
\'ed}{\lang3081 , so that "of queens" or "of nights" is something like ?}{\b\lang3081 t\'e1r\'edva}{\lang3081 , ?}{\b\lang3081 l\'f3m\'edva}{\lang3081  \endash  whereas the singular forms "of a queen" and "of a night" must be }{\b\lang3081 t\'e1riva}{
\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 l\'f3miva}{\lang3081 
. (The pronunciation would be markedly different: these singular forms are accented on the first syllable, the third from the end, whereas the plural forms would be accented on the second-to-last syllable because of the long vowel that suddenly turn
s up there \endash  }{\i\lang3081 if}{\lang3081  the final -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081  of the noun and the first vowel of the ending -}{\b\lang3081 iva}{\lang3081  do indeed merge into a long }{\b\lang3081 \'ed}{\lang3081 
.) But it is also possible that a form like }{\b\lang3081 t\'e1riva}{\lang3081  has to do duty for both singular and plural, so that one must rely on the context to distinguish "of a queen" from "of queens".
\par \tab 
\par There are a few more things to say about the formation of the possessive case (see "Various notes" below), but we will now return to its }{\i\lang3081 function}{\lang3081 .
\par \tab This is the case you use to describe simple }{\i\lang3081 possession}{\lang3081 , the typical function of the English genitive. In the previous lesson, we have described how the Quenya genitive is rather used to indicate }{\i\lang3081 source}{
\lang3081  or }{\i\lang3081 origin}{\lang3081 , not simple ownership. If the Quenya genitive is used to describe the relationship between owners and the things they own, we are dealing with }{\i\lang3081 former}{\lang3081 
 rather than current ownership. Tolkien nicely explained this by contrasting the genitive and possessive cases, and we can well afford to quote him, recapitulating the function of the genitive in the process:}{\i\lang3081 
\par }{\lang3081 
\par }\pard \li705\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 'Possession' was indicated by the adjectival ending -}{\i\lang3081 va}{\lang3081 ... Thus 'Orome's horn' was }{\i\lang3081 r\'f3ma Orom\'e9va}{\lang3081 
 (if it remained in his possession)...but [the genitive phrase] }{\i\lang3081 r\'f3ma Orom\'ebo}{\lang3081  meant 'a horn coming from Orome', e.g. as a gift, in circumstances where the rec
ipient, showing the gift with pride, might say 'this is Orome's horn'. If he said 'this }{\i\lang3081 was}{\lang3081  Orome's horn', he would say }{\i\lang3081 Orom\'e9va}{\lang3081 . Similarly [the genitive phrase] }{\i\lang3081 lambe Eldaron}{\lang3081 
 would not be used for 'the language of the Eldar' (unless conceivably in a case where the whole language was adopted by another people), which is [rather] expressed...by...}{\i\lang3081 lambe Eldaiva}{\lang3081 . [WJ:368-369]
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
\par So the possessive case may indicate simple }{\i\lang3081 ownership}{\lang3081  at the time that is being considered (past or present \endash  whereas }{\i\lang3081 origin}{\lang3081 , or }{\i\lang3081 former}{\lang3081 
 possession, is indicated by the genitive case). An example from the }{\i\lang3081 Silmarillion}{\lang3081  is }{\b\lang3081 Mindon Eldali\'e9va}{\lang3081 , the "Tower of the Eldali\'eb [= Elf-people]", meaning simply a tower owned by the Eldali\'eb
. (Certainly they had also originated it, but they were still its owners, so a genitive would be less appropriate.) We would also have such phrases as }{\b\lang3081 (i) coa i Eldava}{\lang3081  "the Elf's house"/"the house of the Elf", }{\b\lang3081 
i parmar i vend\'edva}{\lang3081  "the books of the maidens", }{\b\lang3081 i m\'edri i Naucoiva}{\lang3081  "the jewels of the Dwarves". As for this word order, it should be observed that the noun which receives the possessive ending appears as the }{
\i\lang3081 last}{\lang3081  word of the possessive phrase in nearly all attested instances: The noun it governs (denoting the thing that is }{\i\lang3081 owned}{\lang3081 ) typically comes before it.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 In the first version of this course, I wrote: "It may well be that one could reverse the word order and say (for instance) ?}{\b\lang3081 i Eldava coa}{\lang3081 
 with the same word order as in English: 'the Elf's house'. However, I would avoid this construction until we have it attested in Tolkien's papers." Perhaps we have it attested now. In June 2002, the phrase }{\b\lang3081 Amill\'eb Eruva liss\'ebo}{
\lang3081  "Mother of divine grace" turned up in VT44:12, in Tolkien's incomplete Quenya translation of the Litany of Loreto. Literally, this seems to mean "Mother of God's grace". Removing }{\b\lang3081 Amill\'eb}{\lang3081 
 "Mother", as well as the genitive ending -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  here attached to }{\b\lang3081 liss\'eb}{\lang3081  "grace, sweetness", we are left with }{\b\lang3081 Eruva liss\'eb}{\lang3081 
 for "God's (Eru's) grace". This could be a (currently unique) example of a possessive form preceding rather than following the noun it connects with. However, the opposite order seems to be much more common, and certainly }{\b\lang3081 liss\'eb Eruva}{
\lang3081  could have been used here as well. In the exercises below, I consistently let the possessive form }{\i\lang3081 follow}{\lang3081  rather than precede the noun it connects with, using more common word order.
\par The noun governed by the possessive does not receive the article in most of our attested examples; it is already sufficiently determined: }{\b\lang3081 R\'f3ma Orom\'e9va}{\lang3081  is not indefinite "}{\i\lang3081 a}{\lang3081  horn of Orom\'eb
's", as if it is first introduced into the story, or it is implied that Orom\'eb
 had other horns as well. (According to Tolkien, this meaning would be expressed by means of a "loose compound", the words simply being juxtaposed without involving any case endings at all: }{\b\lang3081 Orom\'eb r\'f3ma}{\lang3081  = "an Orom\'eb
 horn".) }{\b\lang3081 R\'f3ma Orom\'e9va}{\lang3081  is "Orom\'eb's horn" = "}{\i\lang3081 the}{\lang3081  horn of Orom\'eb", }{\b\lang3081 r\'f3ma}{\lang3081  being determined by }{\b\lang3081 Orom\'e9va}{\lang3081 
. But we could certainly slip in an explicit article and say }{\b\lang3081 i r\'f3ma Orom\'e9va}{\lang3081  without changing the meaning; as demonstrated in the previous lesson, both constructions are equally valid in a phrase involving a }{\i\lang3081 
genitive}{\lang3081  noun. An attested example involving the possessive case is the phrase }{\b\lang3081 i arani Eldaiv\'eb}{\lang3081  "the Kings of the Eldar" (WJ:369; this primarily means "those kings in a particular assembly who were Elvish", whereas 
}{\b\lang3081 i arani Eldaron}{\lang3081  with a genitive means "those among the Eldar who were kings", or simply "the kings ruling the Eldar"). The article could probably be omitted without changing the meaning: }{\b\lang3081 Arani Eldaiv\'eb}{\lang3081 
 would still mean "}{\i\lang3081 the}{\lang3081  kings of the Eldar", the possessive form }{\b\lang3081 Eldaiv\'eb}{\lang3081  determining }{\b\lang3081 arani}{\lang3081  anyway. (As for why the ending -}{\b\lang3081 iva}{\lang3081  here appears as -}{
\b\lang3081 iv\'eb}{\lang3081 , see below; this probably contradicts some evidence from LotR, so we may read }{\b\lang3081 Eldaiva}{\lang3081  instead.)}{\i\lang3081 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 \tab The possessive case does not always indicate "possession"
 in the narrowest sense, but may also describe somebody's relationship to their more-or-less abstract attributes or properties. In such contexts, one can use the genitive as well. Tolkien mentioned that "the splendour (glory) of Orom\'eb
" could be expressed in two ways: One may use the possessive-adjectival case and say }{\b\lang3081 alcar Orom\'e9va}{\lang3081 , referring to Orom\'eb's }{\b\lang3081 alcar}{\lang3081  or splendour as a }{\i\lang3081 permanent}{\lang3081 
 attribute of his. But one could also use the genitive case; the wording }{\b\lang3081 alcar Orom\'ebo}{\lang3081  emphasizes that Orom\'eb is the }{\i\lang3081 source}{\lang3081  of
 the splendour. This could refer to "his splendour as seen at the moment (proceeding from him) or at some point in a narrative" \endash  focusing on the moment rather than on some permanent state (WJ:369). Cirion's Oath uses the }{\i\lang3081 genitive}{
\lang3081  in the phrase }{\b\lang3081 Elenna\'b7n\'f3r}{\b\cf1\lang3081 \'eb}{\b\ul\cf1\lang3081 o}{\b\lang3081  alcar}{\lang3081  "the glory }{\ul\cf1\lang3081 of}{\cf1\lang3081  }{\lang3081 
the land of Elenna". If one used the possessive instead, to produce the wording (}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 ) }{\b\lang3081 alcar Elenna\'b7n\'f3reva}{\lang3081 , it would apparently put the emphasis on the "glory" of Elenna as a }{\i\lang3081 permanent}{
\lang3081  attribute of the land. In Middle-earth time, Cirion's Oath was spoken long after Elenna (N\'famenor) had been destroyed and its "glory" proven to be rather less than permanent, so perhaps this would be inappropriate.
\par \tab In our home-made example }{\b\lang3081 alcar Elenna\'b7n\'f3reva}{\lang3081 , we added the possessive ending to a noun that does not denote a sentient being. This is hardly improper, for we have such attested examples as }{\b\lang3081 Taur\'eb }{
\b\ul\lang3081 Huin\'e9va}{\lang3081  "Forest }{\ul\lang3081 of Gloom}{\lang3081 " and }{\b\lang3081 Nurtal\'eb }{\b\ul\lang3081 Valin\'f3reva}{\lang3081  "Hiding }{\ul\lang3081 of Valinor}{\lang3081 ". Where no sentient is involved, 
the possessive case obviously takes on other shades of meaning; no "ownership" can be involved, since things or substances can't own anything. Cf. for instance the first example of this case that was ever published, in }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{
\lang3081  in LotR. Here we have }{\b\lang3081 yuldar...lisse-miruv\'f3reva}{\lang3081  for "draughts of [the] sweet mead" (in the prose }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081  in RGEO:68, the words are actually directly juxtaposed as }{\b\lang3081 
yuldar lisse-miruv\'f3reva}{\lang3081 ; in the poetic version in LotR, a number of other words intrude between the two elements of this phrase). For decades, this was the sole available example of the case in -}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081 
. Here, this case ending implies "(made) of": The }{\b\lang3081 yuldar}{\lang3081  or "draughts" }{\i\lang3081 consist}{\lang3081  of }{\b\lang3081 lisse-miruv\'f3r\'eb}{\lang3081  or "sweet mead". Following this example, two nouns like }{\b\lang3081 ri
\'eb}{\lang3081  "crown" and }{\b\lang3081 telp\'eb}{\lang3081  "silver" can evidently be combined as }{\b\lang3081 ri\'eb telpeva}{\lang3081 , "crown of silver". It may be noted that in such a case \endash  the possessive noun denoting a }{\i\lang3081 
material}{\lang3081  \endash  the noun it governs is not necessarily be determined by it (not "}{\i\lang3081 the}{\lang3081  crown of silver"). Otherwise, }{\b\lang3081 yuldar lisse-miruv\'f3reva}{\lang3081  would have to mean **"}{\i\lang3081 the}{
\lang3081  draughts of sweet mead", but Tolkien did not translate it in this way. \endash  Having only this one example from }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081  to work from, early researchers thought the case in -}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081 
 was what they called a "compositive" case denoting what something consists of (is }{\i\lang3081 composed}{\lang3081  of). This usage should be noted, but we now know that this is only one of the secondary functions of this case.
\par \tab Yet the fact remains that the ending -}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081  is in origin simply adjectival, so this case may easily take on a "descriptive" function. Regarding the }{\i\lang3081 genitive}{\lang3081  case in -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081 
, Tolkien noted that properly it was NOT used "adjectivally to describe qualities" (WJ:368): this is rather the function of the case in -}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081 . The example }{\b\lang3081 Taur\'eb Huin\'e9va}{\lang3081  (Etym, entry }{\i\lang3081 
PHUY}{\lang3081 ) apparently means "Forest of Gloom"; cf. the nouns }{\b\lang3081 taur\'eb}{\lang3081  "forest" and }{\b\lang3081 huin\'eb}{\lang3081  "deep shadow, gloom". One may almost just as well treat }{\b\lang3081 huin\'e9va}{\lang3081 
 as a regular adjective and translate }{\b\lang3081 Taur\'eb Huin\'e9va}{\lang3081  as "Gloomy Forest" or "Shadowy Forest". The idea is that the "forest" is characterized by "gloom", so the case in -}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081  can describe what }{
\i\lang3081 characterizes}{\lang3081  something or someone. Perhaps the expression }{\b\lang3081 Eruva liss\'eb}{\lang3081  (isolated from a longer phrase, VT44:12) also fits in here: This could be translated "God's grace", but the Litany of Lor
eto that Tolkien was rendering into Quenya has "divine grace" in this place, and it may well be that }{\b\lang3081 Eruva}{\lang3081  is here best understood as an adjective "divine" \endash  not as a noun "God's". The word }{\b\lang3081 Eruva}{\lang3081 
 describes the divine quality of the "grace" as a }{\i\lang3081 characteristic}{\lang3081  of this grace.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 Such a "characteristic" may also be an }{\i\lang3081 abstract}{\lang3081  or }{\i\lang3081 action}{\lang3081 : In early material (LT1:14) we find the example }{\b\lang3081 Mar Vanwa Tyali\'e9va}{
\lang3081  "Cottage of Lost Play" \endash  the }{\b\lang3081 mar}{\lang3081  or "cottage" being characterized by }{\b\lang3081 vanwa tyali\'eb}{\lang3081 , "lost play" (one must read the earliest }{\i\lang3081 Silmarillion}{\lang3081 
 manuscripts as reproduced in LT1 and LT2 to understand precisely what this refers to). It should however be noted that the genitive case may also be used in such a context; in the late essay }{\i\lang3081 Quendi and Eldar}{\lang3081  we have }{
\b\lang3081 Rithil-Anamo}{\lang3081  for "Doom-ring" or more literally "Ring of Doom" (WJ:401; the Old Quenya word }{\b\lang3081 rithil}{\lang3081  "ring, circle" would probably become }{\b\lang3081 risil}{\lang3081  in Exilic Quenya). }{\b\lang3081 
Rithil-Anamo}{\lang3081  does not refer to Sauron's Ring, but to the }{\i\lang3081 M\'e1hanaxar}{\lang3081 , the circle where the Valar passed judgement. The word }{\b\lang3081 anamo}{\lang3081 
 is not otherwise attested, but must be the genitive of either }{\b\lang3081 anama}{\lang3081  or }{\b\lang3081 anan}{\lang3081  (with stem }{\b\lang3081 anam}{\lang3081 -); it apparently means "doom, judgement, judging" \endash 
 the activity characterizing or going on in the Circle (}{\b\lang3081 Rithil}{\lang3081 ). Perhaps the possessive case could have been used instead (?}{\b\lang3081 Rithil Anam\'e1va}{\lang3081  or ?}{\b\lang3081 Rithil Ananwa}{\lang3081 
) without changing the meaning.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 \tab In some instances one may indeed be in doubt which case to use, the genitive or the possessive; sometimes Tolkien's own choice is slightly surprising. He used the possessive in the phrase }{
\b\lang3081 Noldo-quentasta Ingoldo}{\b\cf6\lang3081 va}{\lang3081  "Ingoldo}{\cf6\lang3081 's}{\lang3081  History of the Noldor" (VT39:16) \endash  the Elf Ingoldo being the author of this particular }{\b\lang3081 Noldo-quentasta}{\lang3081 
 or "Noldo-history". Yet the emphasis is hardly on the fact that Ingoldo }{\i\lang3081 owns}{\lang3081 
 this "Noldo-history" (unless copyright was a big issue in Valinor). Ingoldo is just the author or originator, and for this meaning we might expect the genitive case to be used instead, since it frequently describes origin or source. Yet the
re may be certain conflicting concerns here: Since the genitive case may also signify }{\i\lang3081 about}{\lang3081 , }{\i\lang3081 concerning}{\lang3081  (as in }{\b\lang3081 Quenta Silmarillion}{\lang3081 ), perhaps }{\b\lang3081 Noldo-quentasta Ingold
}{\b\cf6\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  with a genitive instead could easily have been misunderstood as "the Noldo-history }{\cf6\lang3081 about}{\lang3081  Ingoldo".
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 Anyhow, in one attested example, Tolkien's choice of case certainly amounts to an outright contradiction of what he had written earlier, in the essay }{\i\lang3081 Quendi and Eldar}{\lang3081 
: We have quoted his explanation of why it would normally be improper to use the genitive in a phrase like }{\b\lang3081 lamb\'eb Eldaron}{\lang3081  "the language of the Eldar" \endash 
 this would imply "the language coming from the Eldar, later taken over by others"! One had to use the possessive case instead: }{\b\lang3081 lamb\'eb Eldaiva}{\lang3081 . Yet }{\i\lang3081 Tolkien himself}{\lang3081  used }{\b\lang3081 lamb\'eb Quendion}
{\lang3081  for "the language of Elves" in a very late source (PM:395) \endash  and }{\b\lang3081 Quendion}{\lang3081  is unmistakably a plural genitive. The fact that Tolkien here uses another word for "Elf" (}{\b\lang3081 Quend\'eb}{\lang3081 
 instead of }{\b\lang3081 Elda}{\lang3081 ) can hardly make any difference: According to the system set out in }{\i\lang3081 Quendi and Eldar}{\lang3081 , we would expect }{\b\lang3081 lamb\'eb Quend\'edva}{\lang3081 
, the possessive case being used of current ownership. Perhaps we can resolve the contradiction in "internal" terms, appealing to a linguistic development within the mythos: Tolkien noted that there was an increas
ing tendency to prefer the genitive case, people sometimes using it instead of the possessive case (WJ:369). So in "late usage" it would perhaps be more natural to say }{\b\lang3081 lamb\'eb Quendion}{\lang3081 , rather than }{\b\lang3081 lamb\'eb Quend
\'edva}{\lang3081  \endash  the former distinctions fading away. If one is in doubt which case to use, the genitive or the possessive, it is probably best to pick the former.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 VARIOUS NOTES
\par }{\i\cf2\lang3081 filling in some details}{\i\lang3081 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\lang3081 NOTE #1:}{\lang3081  }{\i\lang3081 Vowel-lengthening in the syllable preceding the case ending: }{\lang3081 The observant student will have noted that sometimes, the last vowel of a noun is }{
\i\lang3081 lengthened}{\lang3081  when the ending -}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081  is added. For instance, }{\b\lang3081 Eldali\'eb}{\lang3081  + }{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081  produces }{\b\lang3081 Eldali\'e9va}{\lang3081  with a long }{\b\lang3081 \'e9}{
\lang3081  (which must then receive the stress, according to the normal rules). }{\b\lang3081 Orom\'e9va}{\lang3081  and }{\b\lang3081 tyali\'e9va}{\lang3081  as the possessive forms of the nouns }{\b\lang3081 Orom\'eb}{\lang3081  and }{\b\lang3081 tyali
\'eb}{\lang3081  are other examples. Notice that the words }{\b\lang3081 Eldali\'eb}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 Orom\'eb}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 tyali\'eb}{\lang3081  all end in two }{\i\lang3081 short}{\lang3081 
 syllables (containing neither consonant clusters, diphthongs or long vowels). If the ending -}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081  were added after th
em and no further changes were made, the extra syllable provided by this ending would make the stress move to what is now the third syllable from the end (cf. the stress rules set out in Lesson One). This would result in the rather awkward pronunciations 
**}{\i\lang3081 or}{\i\ul\lang3081 OM}{\i\lang3081 eva}{\lang3081 , **}{\i\lang3081 elda}{\i\ul\lang3081 LI}{\i\lang3081 eva}{\lang3081 , **}{\i\lang3081 tya}{\i\ul\lang3081 LI}{\i\lang3081 eva}{\lang3081 . So where the ending -}{\b\lang3081 va}{
\lang3081  is added to a noun ending in two short syllables, and there is no final consonant, the vowel of the last of these syllables is apparently }{\i\lang3081 lengthened}{\lang3081  to make sure that it will receive the stress: }{\i\lang3081 oroM\'c9
va}{\lang3081 , }{\i\lang3081 eldali}{\i\ul\lang3081 \'c9}{\i\lang3081 va}{\lang3081 , }{\i\lang3081 tyali}{\i\ul\lang3081 \'c9}{\i\lang3081 va}{\lang3081 
. But if the noun ends in a consonant, there is never any need to lengthen the vowel, for where we are dealing with a noun of such a shape, the suffixing of the case ending (probably appearing as -}{\b\lang3081 wa}{\lang3081 
) will result in a consonant cluster which will make the stress move to the vowel before the new cluster anyhow. For instance, while a name like }{\b\lang3081 Menelmacar}{\lang3081 
 (the Quenya name of Orion) is naturally accented on the third syllable from the end because it ends in two short syllables, its possessive form }{\b\lang3081 Menelmacarwa}{\lang3081  would be accented on -}{\i\lang3081 arw}{\lang3081 
- because of the cluster }{\b\lang3081 rw}{\lang3081  here arising: This cluster makes what is now the second-to-last syllable }{\i\lang3081 long}{\lang3081 , and therefore it receives the stress.
\par In the original version of this course, I wrote: "It is unclear whether the system just sketched \endash  the final vowel of a noun ending in two short syllables being lengthened before the ending -}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081  \endash 
 would still be valid in the case of a word that }{\i\lang3081 only}{\lang3081  consists of these two short syllables." As I also wrote, my gut feeling was that in such a case, there would be no lengthening. This has now been confirmed by the example }{
\b\lang3081 Eruva}{\lang3081  as the possessive form of }{\b\lang3081 Eru}{\lang3081  (VT44:12, published in June 2002). Though }{\b\lang3081 Eru}{\lang3081  ends in two short syllables, we do not see **}{\b\lang3081 Er\'fava}{\lang3081 
 in the possessive, for the two short syllables of }{\b\lang3081 Eru}{\lang3081  are also the entire word. The lengthening rule only applies to words of more than two syllables.
\par }{\b\lang3081 Huin\'e9va}{\lang3081  (instead of **}{\b\lang3081 huineva}{\lang3081 ) as the possessive form of }{\b\lang3081 huin\'eb}{\lang3081  "shadow, gloom" is however a puzzling example. Here we do see lengthening of the final -}{\b\lang3081 \'eb}{
\lang3081  to -}{\b\lang3081 \'e9}{\lang3081 -. For a while I actually thought final -}{\b\lang3081 \'eb}{\lang3081  is always lengthened before the ending -}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081 , but the Plotz Letter indicates that the possessive form of }{
\b\lang3081 lass\'eb}{\lang3081  "leaf" is }{\b\lang3081 lasseva}{\lang3081  (not **}{\b\lang3081 lass\'e9va}{\lang3081 ). If the }{\b\lang3081 ui}{\lang3081  of }{\b\lang3081 huin\'eb}{\lang3081  is counted as }{\i\lang3081 two syllables}{\lang3081  (}{
\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081 -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 ), not as a diphthong, this example would conform with the rule set out above: }{\b\lang3081 hu-i-n\'eb}{\lang3081  would have its final vowel lengthened when -}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081 
 is added, producing }{\b\lang3081 huin\'e9va}{\lang3081 . But since Tolkien explicitly stated that Quenya }{\b\lang3081 ui}{\lang3081  is a diphthong \endash  hence pronounced as }{\i\lang3081 one}{\lang3081  long syllable and not as two short ones 
\endash  this explanation is not satisfactory. Yet }{\b\lang3081 ui}{\lang3081  is supposed to be a diphthong in Sindarin as well, but in one Sindarin poem, }{\b\lang3081 ui}{\lang3081  occurs where the poetic meter demands two syllables. Perhaps }{
\b\lang3081 ui}{\lang3081 , although a diphthong, is somehow "overlong" and sometimes }{\i\lang3081 counts}{\lang3081  as two syllables, even though it is perceived as one syllable by the ear. Bottom line is, if the case ending -}{\b\lang3081 va}{
\lang3081  is to be added to a noun with }{\b\lang3081 ui}{\lang3081  in its second-to-last syllable, the vowel in the final syllable is apparently lengthened before -}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081  is suffixed. So the possessive form of nouns like }{
\b\lang3081 cuil\'eb}{\lang3081  "life" or }{\b\lang3081 tuima}{\lang3081  "sprout" should evidently be }{\b\lang3081 cuil\'e9va}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 tuim\'e1va}{\lang3081 .
\par As for the }{\i\lang3081 genitive}{\lang3081  ending -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081 , there is no similar lengthening when the ending is to be added to a noun ending in two short syllables: The genitive form of }{\b\lang3081 Orom\'eb}{\lang3081 
 is attested as }{\b\lang3081 Orom\'ebo}{\lang3081 , not **}{\b\lang3081 Orom\'e9o}{\lang3081  (contrast possessive }{\b\lang3081 Orom\'e9va}{\lang3081 ). The form }{\b\lang3081 Orom\'ebo}{\lang3081  must be accented on -}{\i\lang3081 rom}{\lang3081 
-. It seems likely, then, that nothing special happens when -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  is added to a word like }{\b\lang3081 huin\'eb}{\lang3081  either (genitive probably }{\b\lang3081 huin\'ebo}{\lang3081 , hardly ?}{\b\lang3081 huin\'e9o}{\lang3081 
). However, I should like to see an attested example of what happens when the ending -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  is added to a noun ending in two short vowels in hiatus \endash  most frequently -}{\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081 , as in }{\b\lang3081 Vali
\'eb}{\lang3081  "female Vala". ?}{\b\lang3081 Vali\'ebo}{\lang3081  would have to be accented on }{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 , which sounds rather awkward; the same goes for the plural form ?}{\b\lang3081 Valieron}{\lang3081 
. I strongly suspect that in such a case, the vowel in the syllable before the genitive ending would be lengthened, thus attracting the stress: }{\b\lang3081 Vali\'e9o}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 Vali\'e9ron}{\lang3081 
. But once again, there is no way of being certain; we must await further publications. }{\i\lang3081 
\par NOTE #2:}{\lang3081  }{\i\lang3081 Special stem-forms of nouns:}{\lang3081  Where a noun has a special stem-form, it would always appear when the genitive ending -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  is added. The genitive of }{\b\lang3081 n\'eds}{\lang3081  (}{
\b\lang3081 niss}{\lang3081 -) "woman" or }{\b\lang3081 talan}{\lang3081  (}{\b\lang3081 talam}{\lang3081 -) "floor" would be }{\b\lang3081 nisso}{\lang3081  "woman's" and }{\b\lang3081 talamo}{\lang3081  "floor's". Yet the ending -}{\b\lang3081 va}{
\lang3081  or -}{\b\lang3081 wa}{\lang3081  for possessive may sometimes produce more complex results. Adding -}{\b\lang3081 wa}{\lang3081  to a noun like }{\b\lang3081 talan}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 talam}{\lang3081 - would probably result in }{
\b\lang3081 talanwa}{\lang3081 , not **}{\b\lang3081 talamwa}{\lang3081 , since }{\b\lang3081 mw}{\lang3081  regularly becomes }{\b\lang3081 nw}{\lang3081  in Quenya. Suffixing -}{\b\lang3081 wa}{\lang3081  to }{\b\lang3081 filit}{\lang3081  (}{
\b\lang3081 filic}{\lang3081 -) "bird" would result in }{\i\lang3081 filicwa}{\lang3081  all right, but this we must spell }{\b\lang3081 filiqua}{\lang3081  according to the normal conventions. I am not quite sure what the possessive form of }{
\b\lang3081 n\'eds}{\lang3081  (}{\b\lang3081 niss}{\lang3081 -) "woman" should be. **}{\b\lang3081 Nisswa}{\lang3081  is certainly not a possible Quenya word; perhaps we would see something like }{\b\lang3081 nisseva}{\lang3081 , an extra }{\b\lang3081 e
}{\lang3081  turning up before the ending to break up the impossible consonant cluster (and following a vowel, we would regularly see -}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081  instead of -}{\b\lang3081 wa}{\lang3081 ). \endash 
 The "stem-form" of some nouns is simply a contraction, e.g. }{\b\lang3081 fern}{\lang3081 - as the stem of }{\b\lang3081 feren}{\lang3081  "beech-tree". Surely the genitive would be }{\b\lang3081 ferno}{\lang3081 , but the possessive may well be }{
\b\lang3081 ferenwa}{\lang3081  with no contraction, since other examples indicate that such contraction does not occur before a consonant cluster (**}{\b\lang3081 fernwa}{\lang3081  is not a possible Quenya word). Of course we could slip in an }{
\b\lang3081 e}{\lang3081  here as well, producing ?}{\b\lang3081 ferneva}{\lang3081 , but I would certainly put my money on }{\b\lang3081 ferenwa}{\lang3081 .
\par }{\i\lang3081 NOTE #3:}{\lang3081  }{\i\lang3081 A Tolkienian rule we can afford to ignore (!):}{\lang3081  In WJ:407, Tolkien states that the case derived by adding -}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081 
 never lost its strong adjectival connotations; he actually says that it "was and remained an adjective". Compare }{\b\lang3081 Eruva}{\lang3081  being used in the sense "divine" rather than "God's" in Tolkien's Qu
enya Litany of Loreto. As we remember from Lesson Four, adjectives in -}{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081  have plural forms in -}{\b\lang3081 \'eb}{\lang3081  (for archaic -}{\b\lang3081 ai}{\lang3081 
). According to what Tolkien says in WJ:407, a possessive noun (with ending -}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081 ) that governs a }{\i\lang3081 plural}{\lang3081  word would agree with it in number just like any other adjective, the ending -}{\b\lang3081 va}{
\lang3081  turning into -}{\b\lang3081 v\'eb}{\lang3081 . For this reason, he used }{\b\lang3081 i arani Eldaiv\'eb}{\lang3081  for "the Kings of the Eldar" in WJ:369: }{\b\lang3081 Eldaiva}{\lang3081  "of the Eldar" becomes }{\b\lang3081 Eldaiv\'eb}{
\lang3081  (archaic }{\b\lang3081 Eldaivai}{\lang3081 ) to agree in number with the plural noun it is dependent on, namely }{\b\lang3081 arani}{\lang3081  "kings".
\par However, this may be one of the cases of Tolkien revising Elvish grammar without noticing that his new ideas contradicted something he had already published. For in }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081  in LotR, we have }{\b\lang3081 
yuldar...lisse-miruv\'f3reva}{\lang3081  for "draughts of sweet mead", and Tolkien later confirmed this construction in his comments on }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb }{\lang3081 in }{\i\lang3081 The Road Goes Ever On}{\lang3081 . Since }{\b\lang3081 yuldar}
{\lang3081  "draughts" is a plural word, }{\b\lang3081 lisse-miruv\'f3reva}{\lang3081  should have been }{\b\lang3081 lisse-miruv\'f3rev}{\b\ul\lang3081 \'eb}{\lang3081 
 according to the system Tolkien set out in WJ:407. As I said, the likeliest "external" explanation is simply that Tolkien introduced a new rule without noticing that he had already published something that contradicted it. In "internal" terms, we
 may perhaps assume that the possessive form was still perceived as a kind of derived adjective in the older period, and therefore it also agreed in number like regular adjectives. But as the Ages went by in Middle-earth, the forms derived by means of the
 ending -}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081 
 came to be perceived more strictly as a noun case only, and by the late Third Age when Galadriel composed her Lament, the adjective-style agreement in number had been abandoned. I do not use it in the exercises I have made for this course.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 VERBAL OR ABSTRACT NOUNS
\par }{\i\cf2\lang3081 and how they interact with the genitive and possessive cases
\par }{\lang3081 We have earlier defined nouns as words denoting }{\i\lang3081 things}{\lang3081 , whereas verbs are words that denote }{\i\lang3081 actions}{\lang3081  \endash  but we have also hinted that linguists would find such definitions rathe
r simplistic. Some nouns do denote actions, and they are appropriately called }{\i\lang3081 verbal nouns}{\lang3081 
. Since such nouns may interact with the genitive and possessive cases in a way that should be noted, this is a good place to introduce them.
\par \tab A verbal noun is derived from the stem of a verb; in English, the relevant ending is -}{\i\lang3081 ing}{\lang3081 
. (This is also the ending used to derive active participles, but they are adjectives, not nouns; the forms merely happen to coincide in English.) }{\i\lang3081 Singing}{\lang3081  is the verbal noun corresponding to the verb }{\i\lang3081 sing}{
\lang3081 ; in other words, }{\i\lang3081 singing}{\lang3081  is the action you perform when you }{\i\lang3081 sing}{\lang3081 .
\par \tab In Quenya, the stems of some primary verbs are the source of abstract formations in -}{\b\lang3081 m\'eb}{\lang3081 ; some of them seem to have been verbal nouns in origin. For instance, whereas the verb "to love" is }{\b\lang3081 mel}{\lang3081 
-, the noun "love" (or "loving") is }{\b\lang3081 melm\'eb}{\lang3081 . Some of these may take on more specialized meanings. }{\b\lang3081 Carm\'eb}{\lang3081 
 is used for "art" (UT:439), though this is basically simply a kind of verbal noun derived from the verb }{\b\lang3081 car}{\lang3081 - "make, do" \endash  hence literally "making". (See below regarding }{\b\lang3081 oiencarm\'eb}{\lang3081 .)
\par \tab Primary verbs may also receive the ending -}{\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081 ; the verb }{\b\lang3081 tyal}{\lang3081 - "to play" corresponds to the abstract formation }{\b\lang3081 tyali\'eb}{\lang3081  "play, playing" (as noun; cf. the }{\b\lang3081 
Mar Vanwa Tyali\'e9va}{\lang3081  or "Cottage of Lost Play" mentioned above). Added to an A-stem verb, the ending -}{\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081  makes the final -}{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081  drop out; cf. }{\b\lang3081 naina}{\lang3081 
- "to lament" producing the abstract noun }{\b\lang3081 naini\'eb}{\lang3081  "a lament(ing)". 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 Yet another frequent formation is to lengthen the stem-vowel of a primary verb and add the ending -}{\b\lang3081 \'eb}{\lang3081 . The verb }{\b\lang3081 ser}{\lang3081 
- "rest" corresponds to the abstract noun }{\b\lang3081 s\'e9r\'eb}{\lang3081  "rest, repose, peace". Very often, the nouns so derived have taken on a somewhat more concrete meaning. From the verb }{\b\lang3081 sir}{\lang3081 - "to flow" we have }{
\b\lang3081 s\'edr\'eb}{\lang3081 , which would basically refer to a "flowing", but this noun is used = "river". The noun }{\b\lang3081 n\'fat\'eb}{\lang3081  connects with the verb }{\b\lang3081 nut}{\lang3081 
- "to tie", but the noun has developed beyond the full abstract "tying, binding" and has come to signify "knot" instead. From }{\b\lang3081 lir}{\lang3081 - "to sing, chant" we have }{\b\lang3081 l\'edr\'eb}{\lang3081 , used for "
song" rather than just "singing, chanting". Yet the underlying idea of a verbal noun is often discernible still.
\par The stems of some A-stem verbs, especially in -}{\b\lang3081 ta}{\lang3081 , can also be used as abstract nouns with no additions. }{\b\lang3081 Vanta}{\lang3081 - is the verb "to walk", but }{\b\lang3081 vanta}{\lang3081 
 is also used as an abstract: "a walk" (that is, "walking" considered as a noun). Likewise, the verbs }{\b\lang3081 lanta}{\lang3081 - "to fall" corresponds to the noun }{\b\lang3081 lanta}{\lang3081  "a fall(ing)". However, the noun may also be }{
\b\lang3081 lant\'eb}{\lang3081 , as in the name of the song }{\b\lang3081 Noldolant\'eb}{\lang3081  or "Fall of the Noldor" mentioned in the }{\i\lang3081 Silmarillion}{\lang3081 . In Quenya, most abstract nouns indeed end in the vowel -}{\b\lang3081 
\'eb}{\lang3081 , either alone or as part of a longer ending.
\par One such ending is -}{\b\lang3081 l\'eb}{\lang3081 , which seems to one of the most versatile Quenya abstract suffixes. It may be that it can in principle be added to any A-stem verb, and the resulting word is basically a verbal noun. The verb }{
\b\lang3081 laita}{\lang3081 - "to bless/praise" occurs in LotR (in the Cormallen Praise), and the corresponding abstract noun }{\b\lang3081 laital\'eb}{\lang3081  "praise" or "praising" occurs in UT:166, 436 (where reference is made to the }{\b\lang3081 
Erulaital\'eb}{\lang3081  or "Praise of Eru", a N\'famen\'f3rean festival). In earlier lessons we have used the verb }{\b\lang3081 nurta}{\lang3081 - "to hide", which is actually only attested as a verbal noun }{\b\lang3081 nurtal\'eb}{\lang3081 
 "hiding" (see below concerning the phrase }{\b\cf1\lang3081 Nurta}{\b\ul\cf1\lang3081 l\'eb}{\b\cf1\lang3081  Valin\'f3reva}{\cf1\lang3081  "Hid}{\ul\cf1\lang3081 ing}{\cf1\lang3081  of Valinor}{\lang3081 ").
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 \tab Then let us return to the genitive and possessive cases. If you combine a verbal noun (or an abstract formation that still clearly connects with a verb) with a noun in the }{\i\lang3081 genitive}{
\lang3081  case, it suggests that this noun is the "subject" of the corresponding verb. An attested example is }{\b\lang3081 Altariello naini\'eb}{\lang3081  for "Galadriel's lament" (RGEO:66; the Quenya form of Galadriel's name is }{\b\lang3081 Altariel}
{\lang3081  with stem }{\b\lang3081 Altariell}{\lang3081 -). The genitive }{\b\lang3081 Altariello}{\lang3081  "Galadriel's" governing the abstract noun }{\b\lang3081 naini\'eb}{\lang3081  "lament, lamenting" indicates that Galadriel is the one who }{
\i\lang3081 does the lamenting}{\lang3081 : subject genitive. Perhaps the phrase }{\b\lang3081 i equessi R\'familo}{\lang3081  "the sayings of R\'famil" }{\cf1\lang3081 (WJ:398) }{\lang3081 may also be analyzed in such a way: R\'famil is the }{
\i\lang3081 subject}{\lang3081  who originally "said" the "sayings". An obvious case is provided by the phrase }{\b\lang3081 Oiencarm\'eb Eruo}{\lang3081  "the One's [Eru's, God's] perpetual production" (MR:471). Eru is the one who }{\i\lang3081 does}{
\lang3081  the "perpetual production" (}{\b\lang3081 oi-en-carm\'eb}{\lang3081  = probably "ever-re-making"), and this is indicated by the genitive form }{\b\lang3081 Eruo}{\lang3081 : subject genitive yet again.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 Way back in Lesson Two, I pointed out the error contained in the title of the fanzine }{\b\lang3081 Parma Eldalamberon}{\lang3081 ; it should have been }{\b\lang3081 Parma Eldalambion}{\lang3081 
 instead. I must now take affair with the title of another (good!) Tolkien-linguistic journal, }{\b\lang3081 Tyali\'eb Tyelelli\'e9va}{\lang3081 . This was meant to signify "Play of the Tyelelli\'eb" (a folk of little Elves). But since the }{\b\lang3081 
Tyelelli\'eb}{\lang3081  are the }{\i\lang3081 subject}{\lang3081  of the abstract noun "play" (the ones who do the playing), it would probably have been better to use the genitive case here: perhaps }{\b\lang3081 Tyali\'eb Tyelelli\'e9o}{\lang3081 .

\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 \tab So far subject genitive; what about }{\i\lang3081 object}{\lang3081  genitive? This kind of genitive is usually replaced by an }{\i\lang3081 of}{\lang3081 
-construction in English: "the discovery of America" = the discovery which America was the object of. Subject and object genitive can even be combined in a phrase like "Columbus' discovery of America" (Columbus is the }{\i\lang3081 subject}{\lang3081 
 who does the discovery, America is the }{\i\lang3081 object}{\lang3081  that is discovered).
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 Our one-and-only attested example of a Quenya object genitive seems to indicate that for this meaning, Quenya uses the case in -}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081 . This one example is found in the }{
\i\lang3081 Silmarillion}{\lang3081 , near the end of Chapter 11: }{\b\lang3081 Nurtal\'eb Valin\'f3reva}{\lang3081 , the "Hiding of Valinor" (}{\b\lang3081 Valin\'f3reva}{\lang3081  is formed from }{\b\lang3081 Valin\'f3r\'eb}{\lang3081 
, an older variant of the name normally shortened as }{\b\lang3081 Valinor}{\lang3081 ). The point is that the Valar hid Valinor, so Valinor is the }{\i\lang3081 object}{\lang3081  of the }{\b\lang3081 nurtal\'eb}{\lang3081 
 or "hiding". If one used the genitive case instead, saying }{\b\lang3081 Nurtal\'eb Valin\'f3r\'ebo}{\lang3081 , it might imply that this is a subject genitive \endash  Valinor }{\i\lang3081 doing}{\lang3081 
 the hiding instead of being its object. This would make little sense, since Valinor is not a person that can "hide" anything. Conversely, }{\b\lang3081 oiencarm\'eb Eruo}{\lang3081  cannot be understood as "perpetual production }{\i\lang3081 of}{
\lang3081  the One" even if some kind of sense could be made of this, for if Eru were the grammatical object that }{\i\lang3081 is}{\lang3081  }{\i\lang3081 produced}{\lang3081 , we would evidently see }{\b\lang3081 oiencarm\'eb Eruva}{\lang3081  instead.

\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 \tab Probably, the }{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081 -case could be used for subject genitive and the }{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081 -case for object genitive within the same phrase; 
if so it would probably be best to let the former genitive }{\i\lang3081 precede}{\lang3081  the verbal noun. }{\b\lang3081 Nurtal\'eb Valin\'f3reva}{\lang3081  or "Hiding of Valinor" could then be expanded to }{\b\lang3081 Valaron nurtal\'eb Valin\'f3
reva}{\lang3081 , "the Valar's hiding of Valinor". Or, to use a wholly home-made example:
\par 
\par \tab }{\b\lang3081 Eru}{\b\cf6\lang3081 o}{\b\lang3081  melm\'eb Atani}{\b\cf2\lang3081 va}{\lang3081  = "God}{\cf6\lang3081 's}{\lang3081  love }{\cf2\lang3081 of }{\lang3081 Men"
\par 
\par and conversely:
\par 
\par \tab }{\b\lang3081 Atani}{\b\cf6\lang3081 on}{\b\lang3081  melm\'eb Eru}{\b\cf2\lang3081 va}{\lang3081  = "Men}{\cf6\lang3081 's}{\lang3081  love }{\cf2\lang3081 of }{\lang3081 God"
\par 
\par }{\i\cf2\lang3081 Summary of Lesson Twelve:}{\lang3081  The }{\i\lang3081 possessive}{\lang3081  (or }{\i\lang3081 adjectival}{\lang3081 ) case is formed by adding the ending -}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081  (probably -}{\b\lang3081 wa}{\lang3081 
 after nouns ending in a consonant), in the plural -}{\b\lang3081 iva}{\lang3081 . (There is no explicit information about dual forms; presumably the ending -}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081  can be added to nouns with dual forms in -}{\b\lang3081 u}{
\lang3081 , whereas the case ending might appear as -}{\b\lang3081 wa}{\lang3081  when added to a dual form in -}{\b\lang3081 t}{\lang3081 .) If the ending -}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081  is to be added to a noun 
of at least three syllables that ends in a vowel, and the two last syllables are }{\i\lang3081 short}{\lang3081 , then the final vowel is lengthened before the case ending is added so as to attract the stress: the possessive form of }{\b\lang3081 Orom\'eb
}{\lang3081  is therefore }{\b\lang3081 Orom\'e9va}{\lang3081  (not **}{\b\lang3081 Oromeva}{\lang3081 ). For some reason, such lengthening also occur if the diphthong }{\b\lang3081 ui}{\lang3081 
 occurs in the second-to-last syllable of the noun; the possessive form of }{\b\lang3081 huin\'eb}{\lang3081  "gloom" is therefore }{\b\lang3081 huin\'e9va}{\lang3081 . \endash  A possessive phrase like "X Y}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081 
" may mean "Y's X" or "Y of X" referring to simple ownership, e.g. }{\b\lang3081 lamb\'eb Eldaiva}{\lang3081  "the language of the Elves" or }{\b\lang3081 coa i Eldava}{\lang3081  "the Elf's house". The pattern "X Y}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081 
" may also refer to a permanent attribute (e.g. }{\b\lang3081 alcar Orom\'e9va}{\lang3081  "the glory of Orom\'eb"), or to the prevalent }{\i\lang3081 characteristic}{\lang3081  of a place (e.g. }{\b\lang3081 Taur\'eb Huin\'e9va}{\lang3081 
 "Forest of Gloom"). Another use of this case is expressing "X that consists of Y" (e.g. }{\b\lang3081 yuldar lisse-miruv\'f3reva}{\lang3081  "draughts of sweet mead"). \endash  }{\i\lang3081 Verbal nouns}{\lang3081 , or }{\i\lang3081 abstract nouns}{
\lang3081  derived from verbs, denote an action viewed as a "thing" or process. Such nouns may be derived in a variety of ways; relevant endings include -}{\b\lang3081 m\'eb}{\lang3081 , -}{\b\lang3081 l\'eb}{\lang3081 , -}{\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081 
 and -}{\b\lang3081 \'eb}{\lang3081 . Notice especially the ending -}{\b\lang3081 l\'eb}{\lang3081 , which (it seems) may in principle be added to any A-stem verb, as when the verb }{\b\lang3081 linda}{\lang3081 - "to sing" produces }{\b\lang3081 lindal
\'eb}{\lang3081  "singing, music". When dependent on a verbal noun or an abstract clearly associated with some verb, the genitive case takes on the meaning of a }{\i\lang3081 subject genitive}{\lang3081  (as in }{\b\lang3081 Altariell}{\b\ul\lang3081 o}{
\b\lang3081  naini\'eb}{\lang3081  "Galadriel}{\ul\lang3081 's}{\lang3081  lament"), whereas the possessive case is used for }{\i\lang3081 object genitive}{\lang3081  (}{\b\lang3081 Nurtal\'eb Valin\'f3re}{\b\ul\lang3081 va}{\lang3081  "Hiding }{
\ul\lang3081 of}{\lang3081  Valinor").
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 VOCABULARY
\par }{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 minqu\'eb}{\lang3081  "eleven"
\par }{\b\lang3081 varya}{\lang3081 - "to protect"
\par }{\b\lang3081 alya}{\lang3081  "rich"
\par }{\b\lang3081 seler}{\lang3081  (}{\b\lang3081 sell}{\lang3081 -) "sister"
\par }{\b\lang3081 malta}{\lang3081  "gold" }{\fs20\lang3081 (so according to Appendix E of LotR; the }{\i\fs20\lang3081 Etymologies}{\fs20\lang3081 , entry }{\i\fs20\lang3081 SMAL}{\fs20\lang3081 , gives }{\b\fs20\lang3081 malda}{\fs20\lang3081  instead 
\endash  but post-LotR sources seem to indirectly confirm that }{\b\fs20\lang3081 malta}{\fs20\lang3081  was Tolkien's final decision, as when PM:366 cites the Eldarin root yielding words for "gold" as }{\i\fs20\lang3081 MALAT}{\fs20\lang3081 .)}{
\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 engw\'eb}{\lang3081  "thing" 
\par }{\b\lang3081 muil\'eb}{\lang3081  "secrecy" }{\fs20\lang3081 (including one of the abstract endings mentioned above, -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 l\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 ; in this case it is added directly to the root }{\i\fs20\lang3081 MUY}{\fs20\lang3081 
, here manifesting as }{\b\fs20\lang3081 mui}{\fs20\lang3081 -. Apparently this word is related to Sindarin }{\i\fs20\lang3081 muil}{\fs20\lang3081  as in one place-name occurring in LotR: }{\i\fs20\lang3081 Emyn Muil}{\fs20\lang3081 
, possibly meaning something like Hills of Secrecy or Hidden Hills).}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 s\'e9r\'eb}{\lang3081  "peace" }{\fs20\lang3081 (in origin an abstract formation based on the verb }{\b\fs20\lang3081 ser}{\fs20\lang3081 - "to rest", derived from the same root }{\i\fs20\lang3081 SED}{\fs20\lang3081 
 which also produces the name of }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Est\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  [from }{\i\fs20\lang3081 Esd\'ea}{\fs20\lang3081 /}{\i\fs20\lang3081 Ezd\'ea}{\fs20\lang3081 ], the Vali\'eb or "goddess" of rest and sleep)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 ramba}{\lang3081  "wall"
\par }{\b\lang3081 ondo}{\lang3081  "stone" }{\fs20\lang3081 (as material, though }{\b\fs20\lang3081 ondo}{\fs20\lang3081  is also used = "a rock"; the Sindarin equivalent }{\i\fs20\lang3081 gon}{\fs20\lang3081 , }{\i\fs20\lang3081 gond}{\fs20\lang3081 
 occurs in the names }{\i\fs20\lang3081 Gondor}{\fs20\lang3081  and }{\i\fs20\lang3081 Gondolin}{\fs20\lang3081 , the latter of which is adapted from Quenya }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Ondolind\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 )}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 osto}{\lang3081  "city" }{\fs20\lang3081 (according to late sources also used = "fortress", but we will use it in the sense of "city" here; the word seems to refer primarily to a }{\i\fs20\lang3081 fortified}{\fs20\lang3081 
 city, so there may not be much of a distinction anyway)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 morni\'eb}{\lang3081  "darkness" }{\fs20\lang3081 (cf. }{\b\fs20\lang3081 mor\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  "black"; the word }{\b\fs20\lang3081 morni\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 
 is actually an abstract formation based on another adjective derived from the same primitive root }{\i\fs20\lang3081 MOR}{\fs20\lang3081 , namely }{\b\fs20\lang3081 morna}{\fs20\lang3081  = "dark")}{\lang3081 
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 EXERCISES
\par }{\lang3081 
\par These exercises involve both the genitive case and the possessive/adjectival case. Make sure to pick the right case in Exercises }{\i\lang3081 I}{\lang3081 -}{\i\lang3081 P}{\lang3081  (though sometimes, either case will do).
\par 
\par 1. Translate into English:
\par 
\par }{\i\lang3081 A}{\lang3081 . }{\b\lang3081 I limp\'eb Eldaron}{\lang3081  vs. }{\b\lang3081 i limp\'eb Eldaiva}{\lang3081  }{\fs20\lang3081 (and since both phrases may have the same English translation, explain what the difference is)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 B.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Haryaly\'eb yulma maltava.}{\b\i\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 C.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 I rocco i Eldava alanti\'eb mir i n\'fara cilya.
\par }{\i\lang3081 D.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Neri s\'e9reva \'favar ohtari.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 E.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Alt\'eb rambar ondova nurtaner i coar i cainen analy\'eb neriva i osto.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 F.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 I coa i arano selerwa n\'e1 carn\'eb.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 G.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Min\'eb i m\'f3lion am\'e1pi\'eb i macil i aranwa.
\par }{\i\lang3081 H. }{\b\lang3081 I vend\'ebo toron hirn\'eb ily\'eb i harmar i minqu\'eb Naucoiva imb\'eb i canta rassi i ninqui orontion.}{\lang3081 
\par 
\par 2. Translate into Quenya:
\par 
\par }{\i\lang3081 I.}{\lang3081  Rivers of wine poured into the man's mouth.
\par }{\i\lang3081 J. }{\lang3081 The boys' sister [/the sister of the boys] gathered (together) the things of the boys and went into the house of the queen.
\par }{\i\lang3081 K.}{\lang3081  The secrecy of the women protected a great treasure of gold.
\par }{\i\lang3081 L}{\lang3081 . The eleven warriors could not protect the peace of the city, for a great darkness fell.
\par }{\i\lang3081 M.}{\lang3081  They will go through a land of great trees and many rocks, for they want to see the city of the mighty warrior.
\par }{\i\lang3081 N}{\lang3081 . A wall of secrecy protected the hidden gold of the city, and I did not find it.
\par }{\i\lang3081 O}{\lang3081 . The land of the Elves is a land of many beautiful things; a land without Elves is a land of darkness, for the Men (}{\b\lang3081 Atani}{\lang3081 ) of the land do not hear the rich language of the Elves.}{\i\fs32\lang3081 

\par }{\i\lang3081 P.}{\lang3081  The king's sister's gathering of books about Elves. }{\fs20\lang3081 (To make an abstract noun "gathering", try adding the ending -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 l\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  "-ing" to the verb }{\b\fs20\lang3081 hosta}{
\fs20\lang3081 - "to gather".)}{\b\fs36\cf6\lang3081 
\par 
\par 
\par LESSON THIRTEEN}{\b\fs32\lang3081 
\par The Dative case. The Gerund. The pronominal endings -}{\b\i\fs32\lang3081 lm\'eb, }{\b\fs32\lang3081 -}{\b\i\fs32\lang3081 lv\'eb}{\i\fs32\lang3081  }{\b\fs32\lang3081 and -}{\b\i\fs32\lang3081 mm\'eb}{\b\fs32\lang3081 . An indefinite pronoun.
\par }{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 THE DATIVE CASE}{\lang3081 
\par Back in Lesson Five, we introduced the concept of grammatical }{\i\lang3081 objects}{\lang3081 , the "target" of the verbal action performed by the subject: }{\b\lang3081 I Elda m\'e1ta }{\b\i\lang3081 massa}{\lang3081  = "the Elf is eating }{\i\lang3081 
bread}{\lang3081 ", }{\b\lang3081 i Nauco hirn\'eb }{\b\i\lang3081 harma}{\lang3081  = "the Dwarf found }{\i\lang3081 a treasure}{\lang3081 ".
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 So far in this course, all the objects that we have concerned ourselves with have been, more precisely, }{\i\lang3081 direct }{\lang3081 
objects. These are objects directly affected by the verbal action. In archaic Quenya, such objects had their own grammatical case, the accusative \endash  but this case no longer had any distinct forms in Third Age Quenya. But there are also }{
\i\lang3081 indirect}{\lang3081  objects, to which Quenya grammar likewise assigns special case forms. The case marking indirect objects, the }{\i\lang3081 dative}{\lang3081 
, was still alive and well in Third Age Quenya. But before discussing how dative forms are constructed, let us have a closer look on indirect objects.
\par An indirect object is, logically, an object }{\i\lang3081 indirectly}{\lang3081  affected by the verbal action of the sentence. Thus the indirect object is often the beneficiary of the verbal action (though it may also 
denote a party that is adversely affected by this action). The archetypal example involves the verb "to give", which must logically entail three parties: the subject that }{\i\lang3081 does}{\lang3081 
 the giving, the direct object which is the thing that }{\i\lang3081 is}{\lang3081  }{\i\lang3081 given}{\lang3081 , plus the indirect object that is the }{\i\lang3081 recipient}{\lang3081  of the gift and thus the }{\i\lang3081 beneficiary}{\lang3081 
 of the verbal action: 
\par 
\par }{\ul\lang3081 The man}{\lang3081  }{\i\lang3081 [subject]}{\lang3081  gave }{\ul\lang3081 the boy}{\lang3081  }{\i\lang3081 [indirect object]}{\lang3081  }{\ul\lang3081 a book}{\lang3081  }{\i\lang3081 [direct object]}{\lang3081 .
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 Modern English (unlike, say, German) has no distinct dative case, so in the Eng
lish example above, the noun "boy" receives no extra inflectional elements to explicitly mark it as the indirect object of the sentence. In English, indirect objects may be indicated simply by word order; the indirect object is then jammed into the senten
ce in front of the direct object, just like "the boy" appears before "a book" in our example above. But just like English often uses a phrase involving the preposition "of" instead of the genitive case, the absence of a distinct }{\i\lang3081 dative}{
\lang3081  case is frequently compensated for by means of prepositional circumlocutions: The two prepositions most often used to simulate the function of the dative case are "to" and "for". So instead of saying "the man gave }{\ul\lang3081 the boy}{
\lang3081  a book" (word order alone identifying "the boy" as the indirect object), one might say "the man gave a book }{\ul\lang3081 to the boy}{\lang3081 ". Examples with "for" could be, say, "we did it }{\ul\lang3081 for the children}{\lang3081 
", or "the men work }{\ul\lang3081 for the queen}{\lang3081 ". 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 In Quenya, "the boy", "the children" and "the queen" of these examples would be considered indirect objects \endash  the parties indirectly affected by the verbal action \endash 
 and the corresponding nouns would be inflected for the dative case. There would be no need to maintain a specific word order, or to use prepositions like "to" or "for". Cf. the question occurring in the middle of }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081 
, where the pronoun }{\b\lang3081 ni}{\lang3081  "I" (related to the pronominal ending -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  or -}{\b\lang3081 ny\'eb}{\lang3081  of similar meaning) appears in the dative case:
\par 
\par }{\b\lang3081 S\'ed man i yulma }{\b\ul\lang3081 nin}{\b\lang3081  enquantuva?}{\lang3081  "Now who will refill the cup }{\ul\lang3081 for me}{\lang3081 ?"
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
\par The element here translated "for" is not a separate word in Quenya; it is simply the final -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  of }{\b\lang3081 nin}{\lang3081  \endash  which -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  is the Quenya dative ending. Hence }{\b\cf2\lang3081 ni}{
\b\cf6\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  = "}{\cf2\lang3081 I}{\lang3081 -}{\cf6\lang3081 for}{\lang3081 ", or in correct English: "for me". In other contexts it could also have been translated "to me" or (where in English the in
direct object is identified by word order alone) simply "me": The verb "to give" being }{\b\lang3081 anta}{\lang3081 -, the Quenya equivalent of "you will give }{\ul\lang3081 me}{\lang3081  a book" would in all likelihood go something like }{\b\lang3081 
antuvaly\'eb }{\b\ul\lang3081 nin}{\b\lang3081  parma}{\lang3081 . The dative pronoun }{\b\lang3081 nin}{\lang3081  turns up in the last line of }{\i\lang3081 F\'edriel's Song}{\lang3081 
, as part of a sentence which Tolkien translated "what will the Father...give }{\ul\lang3081 me}{\lang3081 ...?" (LR:72). Of course, one might also translate "...give }{\ul\lang3081 to me}{\lang3081 ".
\par \tab The Plotz Letter confirms that the ending -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  for dative is not only applicable to pronouns; it can also be attached to common nouns. (Plotz lists }{\b\lang3081 ciryan}{\lang3081  as the dative form of }{\b\lang3081 cirya}{
\lang3081  "ship" and points to }{\b\lang3081 lassen}{\lang3081  as the dative form of }{\b\lang3081 lass\'eb}{\lang3081  "leaf".) Thus we can build sentences like }{\b\lang3081 carnelyes i }{\b\cf2\lang3081 Nauco}{\b\cf6\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 
 "you did it }{\cf6\lang3081 for}{\lang3081  the }{\cf2\lang3081 Dwarf}{\lang3081 " or }{\b\lang3081 i n\'e9r antuva i parma }{\b\cf2\lang3081 Elda}{\b\cf6\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  "the man will give the book }{\cf6\lang3081 to}{\lang3081  an }{
\cf2\lang3081 Elf}{\lang3081 ". In English, the latter sentence could also be translated "the man will give }{\i\lang3081 an Elf}{\lang3081  the book", word order alone indicating that "an Elf" is to be understood as the indirect object of the English
 sentence. In Quenya, word order would be much freer (the main advantage of a highly inflected language!), the case ending indicating that the noun in question is the indirect object no matter where the noun occurs in the sentence. This enables the speake
r to move the indirect object around to express subtle nuances of emphasis. For instance, we may probably front the indirect object to put special focus on it: }{\b\i\lang3081 Eldan}{\b\lang3081  i n\'e9r antuva i parma}{\lang3081 
, meaning something like "it is to }{\i\lang3081 an Elf}{\lang3081  [not to a Dwarf, etc.] the man will give the book". Whether the direct or the indirect object comes first may not be very material; while }{\b\lang3081 i n\'e9r antuva i parma Eldan}{
\lang3081  means "the man will give the book to an Elf", }{\b\lang3081 i n\'e9r antuva Eldan i parma}{\lang3081  may be translated "the man will give an Elf the book".
\par \tab In the }{\i\lang3081 plural}{\lang3081 , dative forms end in -}{\b\lang3081 in}{\lang3081 . Nouns with nominative plurals in -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081  would in effect simply add the dative ending -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 
; the Plotz Letter points to }{\b\lang3081 lassin}{\lang3081  as the dative form of }{\b\lang3081 lassi}{\lang3081  "leaves". The dative plural of a word like }{\b\lang3081 laman}{\lang3081  (}{\b\lang3081 lamn}{\lang3081 -) "animal" would therefore be }{
\b\lang3081 lamnin}{\lang3081  = "to animals" or "for animals". The ending -}{\b\lang3081 in}{\lang3081  is however also added to nouns that would have nominative plurals in -}{\b\lang3081 r}{\lang3081 ; the plural marker -}{\b\lang3081 r}{\lang3081 
 does not appear in dative forms. From the first line of }{\i\lang3081 F\'edriel's Song}{\lang3081  (translated "the Father made the World }{\ul\lang3081 for Elves}{\lang3081 "), we know what the plural dative of }{\b\lang3081 Elda}{\lang3081  would be: }
{\b\lang3081 Eldain}{\lang3081 . It should be noted that the ending -}{\b\lang3081 in}{\lang3081  merges with the last vowel of the noun to form a diphthong, like }{\b\lang3081 ai}{\lang3081  in this case. }{\i\lang3081 F\'edriel's Song}{\lang3081 
 also provides the dative plural of "Mortals": }{\b\lang3081 F\'edrimoin}{\lang3081  (nominative plural }{\b\lang3081 F\'edrimor}{\lang3081 , LR:245; Tolkien later came to prefer the form }{\b\lang3081 F\'edrimar}{\lang3081 , as in the published }{
\i\lang3081 Silmarillion}{\lang3081 , chapter 12. The dative plural would then become }{\b\lang3081 F\'edrimain}{\lang3081 , of course.)
\par \tab In the previous lesson I pointed out that "it is not quite clear what would happen when the [plural possessive-adjectival] ending -}{\b\lang3081 iva}{\lang3081  is added to a noun already ending in -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 , like }{\b\lang3081 t
\'e1ri}{\lang3081  'queen', or a noun with a stem-form in -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 , like }{\b\lang3081 l\'f3m\'eb}{\lang3081  (}{\b\lang3081 l\'f3mi}{\lang3081 -) 'night' (SD:415)". The same problem arises in 
the case of the plural dative forms. The dative singular "to/for a queen" would presumably be }{\b\lang3081 t\'e1rin}{\lang3081 , but when trying to derive a plural dative by adding -}{\b\lang3081 in}{\lang3081  to }{\b\lang3081 t\'e1ri}{\lang3081 
, we are probably left with }{\b\lang3081 t\'e1rin}{\lang3081  once again (the final -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081  or the noun and the initial }{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 - of the ending simply merging). Conceivably the two vowels might merge into a }{
\i\lang3081 long}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 , producing }{\b\lang3081 t\'e1r\'edn}{\lang3081 
 as the word for "to/for queens", but this seems a somewhat unlikely word: Quenya rarely has a long vowel in a final unaccented syllable (though there is the word }{\b\lang3081 palant\'edr}{\lang3081 ). It may well be that }{\b\lang3081 t\'e1rin}{
\lang3081  has to do duty for both singular and plural, so that one must rely on the context to find out which number is meant.
\par \tab The }{\i\lang3081 dual}{\lang3081  dative ending is given as -}{\b\lang3081 nt}{\lang3081  in the Plotz Letter, the dual dative form of }{\b\lang3081 cirya}{\lang3081  "ship" being listed as }{\b\lang3081 ciryant}{\lang3081  \endash 
 which would mean something like "for a couple of ships". Of course, this ending -}{\b\lang3081 nt}{\lang3081  simply combines the dative ending -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  with the dual ending -}{\b\lang3081 t}{\lang3081 
. Already in Lesson One I briefly mentioned that this -}{\b\lang3081 nt}{\lang3081  seems to be the sole example of a final consonant cluster being allowed in LotR-style Quenya. \endash  It may be that only nouns with nominative dual forms in -}{
\b\lang3081 t}{\lang3081  would have dative dual forms in -}{\b\lang3081 nt}{\lang3081 ; in the case of nouns with dual forms in -}{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081 , it may well be that the simplest dative ending -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 
 would be employed. Once again using }{\b\lang3081 Aldu}{\lang3081  "Two Trees" as our example, the dative form should perhaps not be }{\b\lang3081 Aldunt}{\lang3081 , but rather }{\b\lang3081 Aldun}{\lang3081  (or possibly }{\b\lang3081 Alduen}{
\lang3081 ; see below concerning }{\b\lang3081 Ar-Veruen}{\lang3081 ). We lack examples either way, though.
\par 
\par In some instances, a sent
ence may include an indirect object (in Quenya, a dative object) even though the sentence contains no direct object. In the Quenya equivalent of "the men work for the king", the English preposition "for" would be represented by the case ending -}{
\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  added to }{\b\lang3081 aran}{\lang3081  (probably producing }{\b\lang3081 aranen}{\lang3081 , a helping vowel -}{\b\lang3081 e}{\lang3081 
- intruding before the ending). There is at least one attested example of a sentence having a dative object, but no direct object: Tolkien in his Quenya version of the }{\i\lang3081 Pater Noster}{\lang3081  used a dative form of th
e pronoun "we, us" when rendering the phrase "...those who trespass }{\ul\lang3081 against us}{\lang3081 ". (This, by the way, is an example of the dative case being used to identify a party }{\i\lang3081 adversely}{\lang3081 
 affected by the verbal action: The context must decide whether the dative form should be translated "against us" or "for us". Grammatically speaking, both interpretations would be equally valid, but "those who sin }{\i\lang3081 for us}{\lang3081 
" would not make sense in this particular context.) The verb "to trespass" or "to sin" can have no direct object, but obviously some party may be indirectly affected by the trespassing or sinning, so there can be an indirect object \endash 
 aptly presented as a dative object in Quenya. 
\par \tab Dative forms may also turn up in sentences having }{\i\lang3081 no subject}{\lang3081 , a grammatical phenomenon virtually unheard of in modern English. Yet such sentences may be compared to phrases like "it seems }{\ul\lang3081 to me}{\lang3081 
 that...", where the formal subject "it" is actually nothing but a grammatical dummy with no real content: In informal speech it may even be omitted, "seem
s to me that...", and the meaning is quite intact. Such English wordings are comparable to Quenya phrases like }{\b\lang3081 or\'eb }{\b\cf2\lang3081 ni}{\b\cf6\lang3081 n}{\b\lang3081  caritas}{\lang3081 , literally "[it] impels }{\cf6\lang3081 for }{
\cf2\lang3081 me}{\lang3081  to do it", expressing the meaning that in English might be worded something like "I would like [or, feel moved] to do so" (VT41:13). Notice that the sentence }{\b\lang3081 or\'eb nin caritas}{\lang3081 
 has no subject, but it does have a dative object: }{\b\lang3081 nin}{\lang3081  "to me, for me". }{\b\lang3081 Or}{\lang3081 - or }{\b\lang3081 ora}{\lang3081 - "impel, urge" is one of the Quenya }{\i\lang3081 impersonal verbs}{\lang3081 
 which invite such constructions; we will return to these verbs in a later lesson.
\par \tab Dative forms may even turn up in phrases where no verb occurs at all. Tolkien's (incomplete) translation of the Gloria Patri goes, in part: }{\b\lang3081 Alcar i ataren ar i yondon ar i airef\'eban}{\lang3081 
 = "glory [be] to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit" (VT43:36). Notice the dative ending -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  appended to }{\b\lang3081 atar}{\lang3081  "father", }{\b\lang3081 yondo}{\lang3081  "son" and }{\b\lang3081 airef\'eba}{
\lang3081  "holy spirit". (In the form }{\b\lang3081 ataren}{\lang3081  a connecting vowel -}{\b\lang3081 e}{\lang3081 - is inserted before the ending -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 , since **}{\b\lang3081 atarn}{\lang3081 
 would not be a possible Quenya word.)
\par 
\par }{\i\lang3081 An earlier application of the case ending -}{\b\i\lang3081 n}{\i\lang3081 :}{\lang3081  In Tolkien's long evolution of Quenya, -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 
 was not always the dative ending. From the perspective of the LotR scenario, one of the few things that are "wrong" with the Quenya of the }{\i\lang3081 Etymologies}{\lang3081  (written in the mid-thirties) is that -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 
 is here the }{\i\lang3081 genitive}{\lang3081  ending instead. For instance, the entry }{\i\lang3081 LEP}{\lang3081  lists the names of various Valinorean weekdays, including }{\b\lang3081 Ar Manwen}{\lang3081  = Day of Manw\'eb, or }{\b\lang3081 
Ar Ulmon}{\lang3081  = Day of Ulmo (cf. the noun }{\b\lang3081 ar}{\lang3081 (}{\b\lang3081 \'eb}{\lang3081 ) "day" \endash  but later, Tolkien changed the word for "day" to }{\b\lang3081 aur\'eb}{\lang3081  or }{\b\lang3081 r\'e9}{\lang3081 
, as indicated by the LotR appendices).
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 This use of the ending -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  is also found in a phrase written in the mid-forties, reproduced in SD:303: }{\b\lang3081 Quenta Eldalie}{\b\ul\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 
, "History }{\ul\lang3081 of}{\lang3081  the Elves [}{\i\lang3081 Eldali\'eb}{\lang3081 , Elf-people]". In draft versions of the poem that was to become }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081 , Tolkien used }{\b\lang3081 Vardan}{\lang3081 
 as the genitive "Varda's" (see for instance the early version reproduced in TI:284-285). In one of the later manuscripts, Tolkien still wrote }{\b\lang3081 Vardan}{\lang3081 , but then he crossed it out and replaced it with }{\b\lang3081 Vardo}{
\lang3081 . This may seem to pinpoint the moment when Tolkien changed the genitive ending from -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  to -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081 . Actually the genitive ending -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081 
 turns up in earlier sources as well; a "Qenya" poem of the early thirties already has }{\b\lang3081 ciryo}{\lang3081  (spelt }{\b\lang3081 kiryo}{\lang3081 ) as the genitive of }{\b\lang3081 cirya}{\lang3081  "ship" (}{\b\lang3081 langon veakiryo}{
\lang3081  "the throat of the sea-ship", MC:216). As for the dative case, the "Qenya" of the pre-LotR composition }{\i\lang3081 F\'edriel's Song}{\lang3081  already uses -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  (pl. -}{\b\lang3081 in}{\lang3081 
) as the dative ending, as is evident from some examples quoted above. Later, -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  for a while reverted to being the genitive ending, as the }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081  drafts seem to indicate. 
It appears, then, that Tolkien changed his mind back and forth over the decades \endash  but the final resolution, as reflected in LotR and as codified in the Plotz Letter, was that -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  is to be the }{\i\lang3081 genitive}{
\lang3081  ending, while -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  is the }{\i\lang3081 dative}{\lang3081  ending.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 \tab Some of the obsolete genitives from the }{\i\lang3081 Etymologies}{\lang3081  are still interesting as forms. In the entry }{\i\lang3081 AY}{\lang3081 , the noun }{\b\lang3081 ailin}{\lang3081 
 "pool, lake" is said to have the "g.sg." (genitive singular) }{\b\lang3081 ailinen}{\lang3081 . Because of Tolkien's later revisions, the form }{\b\lang3081 ailinen}{\lang3081  must rather be understood as a }{\i\lang3081 dative}{\lang3081 
 singular in LotR-style Quenya \endash  meaning "for a lake" instead of genitive "of a lake". The example }{\b\lang3081 ailinen}{\lang3081  is interesting insofar as it shows us what happens if the case ending -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 
 (no matter what case it is assigned to!) is added to a noun ending in a consonant, like }{\b\lang3081 ailin}{\lang3081 . Since **}{\b\lang3081 ailinn}{\lang3081  is not a possible Quenya word, an }{\b\lang3081 e}{\lang3081 
 is inserted before the ending, producing }{\b\lang3081 ailinen}{\lang3081 . Though the ending -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  had its meaning redefined, the principle of inserting this helping vowel whenever it is requi
red would still be valid. [Update, late 2002: This assumption has now been confirmed by }{\b\lang3081 ataren}{\lang3081  as the genitive form of }{\b\lang3081 atar}{\lang3081 
 "father", VT43:36. This is a genuine dative form from post-LotR Quenya, so Tolkien was still using the same connecting vowel even after he had changed the meaning of the case ending -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 .]
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 If the noun has a special stem-form \endash  the final consonant turning into another consonant or a consonant cluster when endings are to be added \endash  such changes occur before this extra -}
{\b\lang3081 e}{\lang3081 - as well: In the entry }{\i\lang3081 LIN}{\i\lang3081\super 2}{\lang3081  in the }{\i\lang3081 Etymologies}{\lang3081 , we learn that }{\b\lang3081 Laurelin}{\lang3081  (}{\b\lang3081 Laurelind}{\lang3081 
-), the name of the Golden Tree of Valinor, has the "g.sg." }{\b\lang3081 Laurelinden}{\lang3081 . In LotR-style Quenya, this would be the dative singular instead, but the form as such is presumably valid still. The same goes for }{\b\lang3081 lissen}{
\lang3081  as a form of }{\b\lang3081 lis}{\lang3081  (}{\b\lang3081 liss}{\lang3081 -) "honey"; see the entry }{\i\lang3081 LIS}{\lang3081 . We may then assume that a noun like }{\b\lang3081 n\'eds}{\lang3081  (}{\b\lang3081 niss}{\lang3081 
-) "woman" would be treated in a similar fashion: dative }{\b\lang3081 nissen}{\lang3081 .
\par One of the "genitive" forms of the }{\i\lang3081 Etymologies}{\lang3081  may even throw some light upon what the later }{\i\lang3081 dative}{\lang3081  of dual forms in -}{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081 
 should look like. One Valinorean weekday listed in the entries }{\i\lang3081 BES}{\lang3081  and }{\i\lang3081 LEP}{\lang3081  is }{\b\lang3081 Arveruen}{\lang3081  or }{\b\lang3081 Ar-Veruen}{\lang3081 
, the "Day of the Spouses", referring to the Vala couple Aul\'eb and Yavanna. Here we have }{\b\lang3081 veruen}{\lang3081  as the genitive of the dual form }{\b\lang3081 veru}{\lang3081 
 "spouses, married pair". It should be noticed that the helping vowel -}{\b\lang3081 e}{\lang3081 - is employed here as well (somewhat surprisingly: one might have thought that **}{\b\lang3081 verun}{\lang3081  would be an acceptable form). }{\i\lang3081 
If}{\lang3081  this genitive }{\b\lang3081 veruen}{\lang3081  would still be a valid form after Tolkien redefined the ending -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  so that }{\b\lang3081 veruen}{\lang3081  is a }{\i\lang3081 dative}{\lang3081 
 form in LotR-style Quenya, it would indicate that nouns with nominative dual forms in -}{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081  should have dative forms in -}{\b\lang3081 uen}{\lang3081 . The dative of }{\b\lang3081 Aldu}{\lang3081  "Two Trees" would then be neither 
}{\b\lang3081 Aldunt}{\lang3081  nor }{\b\lang3081 Aldun}{\lang3081 , but rather }{\b\lang3081 Alduen}{\lang3081 . But I hardly need to say that we are not on solid ground here, and I will not construct any exercises based on such hypotheses.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 THE GERUND}{\lang3081 
\par Most of the time, nouns and verbs are distinct parts of speech. There are, of course, the }{\i\lang3081 verbal nouns}{\lang3081  discussed in the previous lesson, but they are unquestionably genuine nouns \endash 
 abstract formations denoting verbal actions considered as "things". But verbs have one form, the }{\i\lang3081 gerund}{\lang3081 , which almost defies the dichotomy of noun vs. verb. One might say that a gerund is a verb masquerading as a noun.
\par \tab In Cirion's Oath occurs the word }{\b\lang3081 enyalien}{\lang3081 , literally meaning "for recalling" (that is, "in order to remember"). The prefix }{\b\lang3081 en}{\lang3081 - means "re-", and the final -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 
 is the case ending discussed above, the dative marker corresponding to the English preposition "for". Stripping away these extra elements, we are left with -}{\b\lang3081 yalie}{\lang3081 -, }{\b\lang3081 yali\'eb}{\lang3081 
. In his notes on Cirion's Oath, as reproduced in UT:317, Tolkien makes it clear that }{\b\lang3081 yali\'eb}{\lang3081  is an "infinitive (or gerundial) form" of a verb }{\b\lang3081 yal}{\lang3081 -, meaning to call or to summon. Thus we can isolate -}{
\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081  as a grammatical ending used to derive 'infinitive or gerundial' forms.
\par \tab Earlier in this course, we have discussed another kind of infinitive, which is simply the stem of the verb (with -}{\b\lang3081 \'eb}{\lang3081  added, in the case of primary verbs). An attested example is the sentence }{\b\lang3081 polin }{
\b\ul\lang3081 quet\'eb}{\lang3081 , "I can }{\ul\lang3081 speak}{\lang3081 " (VT41:6), with }{\b\lang3081 quet\'eb}{\lang3081  as the infinitive form of the verb }{\b\lang3081 quet}{\lang3081 - "speak". Since Tolkien clearly identifies -}{\b\lang3081 i
\'eb}{\lang3081  as an infinitive ending in UT:317, it }{\i\lang3081 may}{\lang3081  be that }{\b\lang3081 polin queti\'eb}{\lang3081  would have be equally possible (more on this below). In her tutorial }{\i\lang3081 Basic Quenya}{\lang3081 
, written before the example }{\b\lang3081 polin quet\'eb}{\lang3081  became available, Nancy Martsch uses -}{\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081  as the Quenya infinitival ending throughout. This may not necessaril
y be wrong; Tolkien definitely imagined an old Elvish infinitive in -}{\i\lang3081 ie}{\lang3081 . In the }{\i\lang3081 Etymologies}{\lang3081 , entry }{\i\lang3081 NAR}{\i\lang3081\super 2}{\lang3081 , the Old Noldorin word }{\i\lang3081 trenarie}{
\lang3081  "to recount" is explicitly called an "inf." form ("Old Noldorin" being the language Tolkien might later have referred to as Old }{\i\lang3081 Sindarin}{\lang3081 
, after he revised his linguistic mythos in the early fifties). However, I think that in many cases, the Quenya verb forms derived by means of the suffix -}{\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081  are best termed }{\i\lang3081 gerunds}{\lang3081 
 (rather than infinitives).
\par \tab In English, gerunds are derived by means of the ending -}{\i\lang3081 ing}{\lang3081 
, e.g. "finding" vs. the verb "to find". Now a form like "finding" can of course also be an abstract noun (synonymous with "discovery") as well as an adjectival participle (as in "the man finding the treasure"). But what we are
 interested in here, is rather the word "finding" as it appears in a sentence like "finding the treasure was wonderful". Here, "finding" in a way behaves like a noun, for it is the subject of the sentence. But we can tell that in some sense, "finding" }{
\i\lang3081 is still a verb}{\lang3081 
, for it has not lost one of the unique characteristics of a verb: the ability to take an object. In the phrase "finding the treasure", "the treasure" is the object of "finding". If "finding" had here been an abstract noun, one would have to use
 an "of"-construction to bring in the thing which is found: "the finding (= discovery) of the treasure". Cf. our discussion of the Quenya object genitive (as in }{\b\lang3081 Nurtal\'eb Valin\'f3reva}{\lang3081 
, "Hiding of Valinor") in the previous lesson.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 Since we are able to tell that in the sentence "finding the treasure was wonderful", the word "finding" is not a verbal noun, we can conclude that it is actually a }{\i\lang3081 gerund}{\lang3081 
. A gerund is a form of the verb which can function as a noun, with much the same meaning as a genuine verbal noun. However, a gerund is still capable of taking an object, and this goes for Quenya gerunds as well: Regarding the Quenya gerundial form in -}
{\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081  which Tolkien used in Cirion's Oath, he noted that it was "governing a direct object" (UT:317).
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs20\cf1\lang3081 NOTE: In Quenya as in English, gerunds and abstract nouns cannot always be clearly distinguished. Just like the English ending -}{\i\fs20\cf1\lang3081 ing}{\fs20\cf1\lang3081 
 is used to derive both gerunds and verbal nouns, the Quenya ending -}{\b\fs20\cf1\lang3081 i\'eb}{\fs20\cf1\lang3081  may also be used to derive abstracts, e.g. }{\b\fs20\cf1\lang3081 tyali\'eb}{\fs20\cf1\lang3081  "play" (as noun) from the verb }{
\b\fs20\cf1\lang3081 tyal}{\fs20\cf1\lang3081 - "to play". Indeed -}{\b\fs20\cf1\lang3081 i\'eb}{\fs20\cf1\lang3081  is also used as a general abstract ending, much like English "-ness", cf. for instance }{\b\fs20\cf1\lang3081 morni\'eb}{
\fs20\cf1\lang3081  "darkness".
\par }{\lang3081 \tab As usual, there is an extreme scarcity of attested examples. But we must assume that in Quenya as in English, gerunds may often function as the subjects of sentences, perhaps something like this:
\par 
\par \tab }{\b\cf2\lang3081 Hir}{\b\cf6\lang3081 i\'eb}{\b\lang3081  harma caruva n\'e9r alya}{\lang3081  "}{\cf2\lang3081 find}{\cf6\lang3081 ing}{\lang3081  a treasure will make a man rich"
\par }{\b\lang3081 \tab }{\b\cf2\lang3081 Tir}{\b\cf6\lang3081 i\'eb}{\b\lang3081  i aiwi anta i vendin alta alass\'eb}{\lang3081  "}{\cf2\lang3081 watch}{\cf6\lang3081 ing }{\lang3081 the birds gives the maidens [}{\b\lang3081 vendin}{\lang3081 
, dative] great joy"
\par 
\par In these examples we have equipped the gerunds with objects (}{\b\lang3081 harma}{\lang3081  and }{\b\lang3081 i aiwi}{\lang3081 ), but a gerund could certainly function as subject without any further additions}{\cf1\lang3081 , for instance like this: }{
\b\ul\cf1\lang3081 Mati\'eb}{\b\cf1\lang3081  n\'e1 i analta alass\'eb ily\'eb tiuc\'eb Naucoron}{\cf1\lang3081 , "}{\ul\cf1\lang3081 eating}{\cf1\lang3081  is the greatest}{\lang3081  joy of all fat Dwarves".
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 Presumably Quenya gerunds can also function as the }{\i\lang3081 object}{\lang3081 
 of a sentence, comparable to such English constructions as "I love fishing". The gerund functioning as object may in turn govern its own object: A sentence like "I love }{\cf2\lang3081 watch}{\cf6\lang3081 ing}{\lang3081  }{\cf5\lang3081 the birds}{
\lang3081 " may perhaps be rendered into Quenya as }{\b\lang3081 melin }{\b\cf2\lang3081 tir}{\b\cf6\lang3081 i\'eb}{\b\lang3081  }{\b\cf5\lang3081 i aiwi}{\lang3081 
 ("watching" being the object of the phrase "I love", and "the birds" in turn being the object of the gerund "watching"). Perhaps the latter might also be expressed as "I love }{\cf2\lang3081 to watch}{\lang3081  }{\cf5\lang3081 the birds}{\lang3081 " = }
{\b\lang3081 melin }{\b\cf2\lang3081 tir\'eb}{\b\lang3081  }{\b\cf5\lang3081 i aiwi}{\lang3081  (?), using an infinitive instead of a gerund. Gerunds and infinitives may well be interchangeable in many contexts, in Quenya as in English. 
\par Indeed our terminology may be stricter than the one Tolkien himself used, if we reserve the term }{\i\lang3081 infinitive}{\lang3081  for forms like }{\b\lang3081 tir\'eb}{\lang3081  "to watch" and insist on calling }{\b\lang3081 tiri\'eb}{\lang3081 
 "watching" a }{\i\lang3081 gerund}{\lang3081  only: In UT:317, quoted above, Tolkien himself refers to the forms in -}{\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081  as both "infinitival" and "gerundial". As we mentioned above, in the "Old Noldorin" of the }{\i\lang3081 
Etymologies}{\lang3081  one form in -}{\i\lang3081 ie}{\lang3081  is explicitly identified as an infinitive. The post-LotR example }{\b\lang3081 polin }{\b\ul\lang3081 quet\'eb}{\lang3081  "I can }{\ul\lang3081 speak}{\lang3081 " demonstrates that -}{
\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081  at least cannot be a universal infinitive ending. Would }{\b\lang3081 polin queti\'eb}{\lang3081 
 be a possible wording, or would this sound about as weird as "I can speaking" in English? And what about "I want to find a treasure"? Would }{\b\lang3081 merin hiri\'eb harma}{\lang3081  be OK, or would the Eldar find this wording as awkwa
rd as "I want finding a treasure" in English? It may be safer to use the simplest infinitive, }{\b\lang3081 hir\'eb}{\lang3081 , in such a context. 
\par When a verbal action is the subject or object of a sentence, one may to some extent choose between the infinitives and gerunds in Englis
h: "To err is human, to forgive is divine" = "Erring is human, forgiving is divine". Especially when a verbal action functions as subject, I think it would be safer to use the gerund (the form in -}{\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081 
) in Quenya. But since we have no actual examples, it is presently impossible to say with any confidence what Tolkien would have thought of as acceptable Quenya in this regard.
\par There is, however, one important use of the gerund which luckily }{\i\lang3081 is}{\lang3081  attested in our tiny corpus. In English, the normal infinitive (marked by "to") is often used to indicate }{\i\lang3081 purpose:}{\lang3081  "They have come }{
\i\lang3081 to see}{\lang3081  the king." Whether this could be rendered "directly" into Quenya as ?}{\b\lang3081 ut\'falient\'eb }{\b\i\lang3081 cen\'eb}{\b\lang3081  i aran}{\lang3081  none can say at present \endash 
 but I tend to doubt that this is a valid construction. Notice the wording used in }{\i\lang3081 Cirion's Oath}{\lang3081 : }{\b\lang3081 Vanda sina termaruva Elenna\'b7n\'f3r\'ebo alcar enyalien. }{\lang3081 
Tolkien's translation in UT:305 goes "this oath shall stand in memory of the glory of the Land of the Star", but more literally the Quenya wording is something like "this oath sh
all stand for recalling [the] Elenna-land's glory". Cf. Tolkien's comments on the form }{\b\lang3081 enyalien}{\lang3081  in UT:317, already quoted in part:
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
\par }\pard \li708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\lang3081 yal}{\lang3081 - 'summon', in infinitive (or gerundial) form }{\i\lang3081 en-yali\'eb}{\lang3081 , here in dative 'for the re-calling', but governing a direct object [namely }{\b\lang3081 alcar
}{\lang3081  "glory"]: thus 'to recall or "commemorate" the glory'.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
\par So here we have a verb }{\b\lang3081 en-yal}{\lang3081 - "re-call-" = "commemorate". Add the gerundial ending -}{\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081 , and we get the gerund }{\b\lang3081 enyali\'eb}{\lang3081 
, "recalling". Since a gerund may be described as a verb functioning as a noun, it may also receive }{\i\lang3081 case endings}{\lang3081  as a noun. So Tolkien supplied the }{\i\lang3081 dative}{\lang3081  ending -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 
 "for" to produce }{\b\lang3081 enyalien}{\lang3081  "for recalling". The word can now function as the indirect object of the sentence, the "benefactor" of the verbal action: The oath }{\b\lang3081 termaruva}{\lang3081 
 "shall stand", and this action promotes "recalling" (}{\b\lang3081 enyali\'eb}{\lang3081 ). The dative gerund }{\b\lang3081 enyalien}{\lang3081  "for recalling" in turn has }{\b\lang3081 Elenna\'b7n\'f3r\'ebo alcar}{\lang3081 
, "[the] Elenna-land's glory", as its object.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 Of course, in English one does not say "this oath shall stand for recalling the Elenna-land's glory", but rather "this oath shall stand (in order) }{\i\lang3081 to recall}{\lang3081 
 the glory of the land of Elenna". Nonetheless, this example seems to tell us that English infinitives indicating }{\i\lang3081 purpose}{\lang3081  should be rendered into Quenya as gerunds 
with a dative ending attached. "They have come (in order) to see the king" would then translate into }{\b\lang3081 ut\'falient\'eb }{\b\cf2\lang3081 cen}{\b\cf6\lang3081 ie}{\b\cf5\lang3081 n}{\b\lang3081  i aran}{\lang3081 , literally "they have come }{
\cf5\lang3081 for }{\cf2\lang3081 see}{\cf6\lang3081 ing}{\lang3081  the king". (If we were to slavishly follow the word order Tolkien used in Cirion's Oath, with the gerund at the end of the sentence, we would actually have to say }{\b\lang3081 ut\'fa
lient\'eb i aran cenien}{\lang3081  = "they have come the king for seeing"! However, Quenya word order is in all likelihood quite flexible.) The rule we have tried to make out may be summarized like this:}{\i\lang3081  }{\lang3081 
If in English you can add the words "in order" in front of a infinitive without destroying the meaning (never mind the style!), this infinitive indicates }{\i\lang3081 purpose}{\lang3081 
 and should be rendered into Quenya as a gerund inflected for dative.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 Forming gerunds from A-stem verbs:}{\lang3081  All the gerunds so far exemplified have been formed from primary (ending-less) verbs. What happens if the ending -}{\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081 
 is to be added to an A-stem verb? We have no direct, explicit attestations to guide us, so I saved this problem for the end. But all the indirect evidence points to one conclusion: the final -}{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081  should be dropped before -}{
\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081  is suffixed.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 The }{\i\lang3081 Etymologies}{\lang3081 , entry }{\i\lang3081 ORO}{\lang3081 , lists the Quenya verb }{\b\lang3081 orta}{\lang3081 - "rise, raise", but a form }{\i\lang3081 ortie}{\lang3081 
 is also cited, though this is "Old Noldorin" (/Old Sindarin) rather than Quenya. This word }{\i\lang3081 ortie}{\lang3081 , simply glossed "rise", would be an archaic Elvish form that later evolved into a Sindarin
 infinitive. But it could very well correspond to a Quenya gerund }{\b\lang3081 orti\'eb}{\lang3081  "rising, raising", since "Old Noldorin" is relatively close to Quenya. This would indicate that when the ending -}{\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081 
 is to be added to an A-stem verb, the final -}{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081  drops out before the ending. We have one }{\i\lang3081 possible}{\lang3081  attestation of a Quenya form which would confirm this conclusion: Listing various forms of the verb }{
\b\lang3081 ora}{\lang3081 - "urge", Tolkien did include }{\b\lang3081 ori\'eb}{\lang3081  (VT41:13), and while he did not clearly identify this or any other of the forms, }{\b\lang3081 ori\'eb}{\lang3081  may well be intended as the gerund. Also notice }
{\b\lang3081 naini\'eb}{\lang3081  "lament(ing)" as a derivative of the verb }{\b\lang3081 naina}{\lang3081 - "to lament" (compare RGEO:66 with the }{\i\lang3081 Etymologies}{\lang3081 , entry }{\i\lang3081 NAY}{\lang3081 ): }{\b\lang3081 Naini\'eb}{
\lang3081  may be seen either as a gerund or as a verbal noun.
\par As we have already touched on, -}{\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081  can also function as a general abstract ending, somewhat like English "-ness". Where -}{\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081  is used to form abstract nouns from adjectives, adjectives in -}{
\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081  lose this final vowel before -}{\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081  is added; }{\b\lang3081 morni\'eb}{\lang3081  "darkness" is apparently formed from }{\b\lang3081 morna}{\lang3081  "dark". Another attested pair of this kind is }{
\b\lang3081 l\'e1ta}{\lang3081  "open" vs. }{\b\lang3081 l\'e1ti\'eb}{\lang3081  "openness". The abstract ending -}{\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081  is certainly closely related to the gerundial ending -}{\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081 
; basically it is the same ending we are dealing with (as noted above, the distinction between gerunds and abstract nouns often becomes blurred). If the ending -}{\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081  causes a final -}{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081 
 to drop out when it is added to adjectives, it seems very likely that this also happens when it is added to A-stem verbs. So starting from verbs like }{\b\lang3081 orta}{\lang3081 - "raise" and }{\b\lang3081 nurta}{\lang3081 - "h
ide", we may probably derive the gerunds }{\b\lang3081 orti\'eb}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 nurti\'eb}{\lang3081  and build sentences like}{\b\lang3081  orti\'eb Pel\'f3ri nurtien Valinor \'fam\'eb m\'e1ra noa}{\lang3081  "raising [the] Pel\'f3
ri to hide Valinor was not a good idea". (It wasn't \endash  see MR:401, 405 for Tolkien's critical comments on this move by the Valar!)
\par In the case of verbs in -}{\b\lang3081 ya}{\lang3081 , e.g. }{\b\lang3081 harya}{\lang3081 - "to possess", the entire ending -}{\b\lang3081 ya}{\lang3081  would probably drop out before -}{\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081 
 is suffixed. Otherwise the gerund would have to be **}{\b\lang3081 haryi\'eb}{\lang3081 , but }{\b\lang3081 yi}{\lang3081  is not a possible Quenya combination. Abstract nouns formed by means of the ending -}{\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081  from }{
\i\lang3081 adjectives}{\lang3081  in -}{\b\lang3081 ya}{\lang3081  are seen to surrender the latter ending, e.g. }{\b\lang3081 veri\'eb}{\lang3081  "boldness" from }{\b\lang3081 verya }{\lang3081 "bold" (see the }{\i\lang3081 Etymologies}{\lang3081 
, entry }{\i\lang3081 BER}{\lang3081 ). We may probably assume that }{\b\lang3081 veri\'eb}{\lang3081  would also be the gerund of the related verb }{\b\lang3081 verya}{\lang3081 - "to dare". So the gerund of a verb like }{\b\lang3081 harya}{\lang3081 
- "to possess" is most likely }{\b\lang3081 hari\'eb}{\lang3081  (e.g. in a platitude like }{\b\lang3081 hari\'eb malta \'fava car\'eb n\'e9r anwav\'eb alya}{\lang3081 , "possessing gold will not make a man truly rich").
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 THE PRONOUN "WE"}{\lang3081 
\par We have been practicing various pronominal endings: -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  or -}{\b\lang3081 ny\'eb}{\lang3081  "I" (the short form must not be confused with the dative ending!), -}{\b\lang3081 ly\'eb}{\lang3081  "you", -}{\b\lang3081 s}{\lang3081 
 "it", -}{\b\lang3081 nt\'eb}{\lang3081  "they" and -}{\b\lang3081 t}{\lang3081  "them". It is time to introduce the endings for the first person plural, corresponding to the English pronoun "we".
\par \tab There are actually several Quenya endings for "we". One of them occurs in the Cormallen Praise: }{\b\lang3081 Andav\'eb laituvalmet}{\lang3081 , "long shall we bless them". Here we have a future-tense verb with pronominal endings for "we" (
subject) and "them" (object): }{\b\lang3081 lait\'b7uva\'b7}{\b\cf6\lang3081 lme}{\b\lang3081 \'b7}{\b\cf2\lang3081 t}{\lang3081 , "bless}{\b\lang3081 \'b7}{\lang3081 shall}{\b\lang3081 \'b7}{\cf6\lang3081 we}{\b\lang3081 \'b7}{\cf2\lang3081 them}{
\lang3081 ". The ending for "we" is seen to be -}{\b\lang3081 lm\'eb}{\lang3081  (-}{\b\lang3081 lme}{\lang3081 -).
\par \tab However, in WJ:371 Tolkien discusses the Quenya exclamation }{\b\lang3081 v\'e1}{\lang3081 , signaling }{\i\lang3081 refusal}{\lang3081  or }{\i\lang3081 prohibition}{\lang3081 : in effect "no!" in the sense of "I will 
not" or "do not!" Tolkien also indicated that this }{\b\lang3081 v\'e1}{\lang3081  could receive explicit pronominal endings, such as -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 (}{\b\lang3081 y\'eb}{\lang3081 ) for "I", producing the form }{\b\lang3081 v\'e1n}{
\lang3081  or }{\b\lang3081 v\'e1ny\'eb}{\lang3081  for "I won't". But Tolkien also mentioned the form }{\b\lang3081 vamm\'eb}{\lang3081 , "we won't". So here the pronominal ending for "we" is suddenly not -}{\b\lang3081 lm\'eb}{\lang3081 , but rather -}{
\b\lang3081 mm\'eb}{\lang3081 . 
\par }{\fs20\lang3081 NOTE: Notice, by the way, how the long }{\b\fs20\lang3081 \'e1}{\fs20\lang3081  of }{\b\fs20\lang3081 v\'e1}{\fs20\lang3081  is shortened in the form }{\b\fs20\lang3081 vamm\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 
. This is one of the examples indicating that Quenya cannot have a long vowel in front of a consonant cluster or a long consonant \endash  a phonological rule we have repeatedly alluded to earlier in this course. The fact that the vowel remains long in }{
\b\fs20\lang3081 v\'e1ny\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  suggests that }{\b\fs20\lang3081 ny}{\fs20\lang3081  is perceived as a single consonant, palatalized }{\b\fs20\lang3081 n}{\fs20\lang3081  like Spanish }{\i\fs20\lang3081 \'f1}{\fs20\lang3081 
, and not as a cluster }{\b\fs20\lang3081 n}{\fs20\lang3081  + }{\b\fs20\lang3081 y}{\fs20\lang3081 .
\par }{\lang3081 \tab The fact that there are two endings for "we", -}{\b\lang3081 mm\'eb}{\lang3081  and -}{\b\lang3081 lm\'eb}{\lang3081 
, is easily explained once we realize that this part of the Quenya pronoun table makes a distinction not found in English. Tolkien referred to the ending -}{\b\lang3081 mm\'eb}{\lang3081  as the "first [person] plural }{\i\lang3081 exclusive}{\lang3081 
" (WJ:371, emphasis added). The ending -}{\b\lang3081 mm\'eb}{\lang3081  denotes an }{\i\lang3081 exclusive}{\lang3081  "we", a "we" that excludes the person(s) addressed. The exclamation }{\b\lang3081 vamm\'eb}{\lang3081  "we won't" represents a refusal}
{\i\lang3081  as it would be spoken to some other party}{\lang3081  (likely the one whose will "we" refuse to obey). This other party is not included in "we", but stands outside the "we" group. Therefore, the exclusive "we" is proper here.
\par \tab On the other hand, the ending -}{\b\lang3081 lm\'eb}{\lang3081  apparently denotes an }{\i\lang3081 inclusive}{\lang3081  "we": The party being addressed is included in "we". In the example }{\b\lang3081 andav\'eb laituvalmet}{\lang3081 
, "long shall we bless them", the people who are praising Frodo and Sam are addressing one another, not the Ring-bearers. If they had said "long shall we bless }{\i\lang3081 you}{\lang3081 
" instead, addressing Frodo and Sam directly, they would have had to use an exclusive "we": ending -}{\b\lang3081 mm\'eb}{\lang3081  instead of -}{\b\lang3081 lm\'eb}{\lang3081 
. Frodo and Sam would not be part of this exclusive "we"; they would stand outside the "we" group addressing them. (Conversely, a group of people conspiring }{\i\lang3081 among}{\lang3081  }{\i\lang3081 themselves}{\lang3081 
 about refusing an order would have to say }{\b\lang3081 valm\'eb}{\lang3081 , not }{\b\lang3081 vamm\'eb}{\lang3081 , for "we won't!")
\par \tab In written works, the word "we" would normally be exclusive (-}{\b\lang3081 mm\'eb}{\lang3081 ),
\par unless the writer has reason to believe that the reader will be part of the "we" group referred to. In such a case, -}{\b\lang3081 lm\'eb}{\lang3081  for inclusive "we" would be proper.
\par \tab Bac
k in Lesson Eight, it was noted that while the author of this course may sometimes seem to refer to himself as "we", this is not (necessarily!) because he has an ego of royal dimensions. The author tends to include the reader in this "we", as if implying 
t
hat the author and the readers somehow share this odyssey through the various aspects of Quenya grammar. (You can take it as a friendly gesture, or as a particularly cunning brain-wash technique which the author uses to somehow make you an accomplice when
ever he draws conclusions that he should actually take the full responsibility for himself!) Anyhow, in Quenya there could have been no misunderstanding. A royal "we", excluding the people addressed, could only be -}{\b\lang3081 mm\'eb}{\lang3081 
. An author using the word "we" to refer to himself }{\i\lang3081 and his readers}{\lang3081 , directly addressing them in his text, would have to use the inclusive "we": -}{\b\lang3081 lm\'eb}{\lang3081 .
\par \tab There is yet another ending for "we", namely the }{\i\lang3081 dual inclusive}{\lang3081 , which is "we" referring to two persons only \endash  in effect "you and I" or "the two of us". (The ending -}{\b\lang3081 lm\'eb}{\lang3081 
 would refer to an inclusive "we" involving three or more persons.) Unfortunately, the ending denoting dual inclusive "we" must be extrapolated in a two-step operation, and we cannot be quite certain about its form (most likely either -}{\b\lang3081 lw
\'eb}{\lang3081  or -}{\b\lang3081 lv\'eb}{\lang3081 ). We will return to this problem later; in the exercises below, we will only practice the endings -}{\b\lang3081 lm\'eb}{\lang3081  and -}{\b\lang3081 mm\'eb}{\lang3081 .
\par }{\fs20\lang3081 NOTE: There has been much confusion regarding the Quenya endings for "we". An earlier interpretation, set forth in Jim Allan's }{\i\fs20\lang3081 Introduction to Elvish}{\fs20\lang3081  in the late seventies, had it that the ending -}{
\b\fs20\lang3081 lm\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  is exclusive rather than inclusive. The extrapolated ending -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 lv\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  was thought to be the inclusive "we" (and inclusive it would certainly have to be, but it is a }{
\i\fs20\lang3081 dual}{\fs20\lang3081  inclusive form, referring to a "we" of two persons only). The true ending for exclusive "we", -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 mm\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 , was unknown until WJ was published in 1994 (providing the example }{
\b\fs20\lang3081 vamm\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 ). The wrong interpretation haunts many post-Tolkien Quenya texts written before the mid-nineties, and it also made its way into Nancy Martsch' }{\i\fs20\lang3081 Basic Quenya}{\fs20\lang3081 .
\par }{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 AN INDEFINITE PRONOUN
\par }{\lang3081 In English, words like "one" and "you" are often used with deliberately vague or general reference: "One has to earn a living..." or "you have to wonder..." Here, "one" is not the number 1 (Quenya }{\b\lang3081 min\'eb}{\lang3081 
), and "you" does not refer to the one who is addressed. For such meanings, Quenya has the pronoun }{\b\lang3081 quen}{\lang3081  (WJ:361) \endash  essentially an unstressed variant of the noun }{\b\lang3081 qu\'e9n}{\lang3081 
, which simply means "person". Though ultimately related to }{\b\lang3081 Quend\'eb}{\lang3081  "Elf", these words have no special reference to Elves. As usual, we lack attested examples, but we must assume that }{\b\lang3081 quen}{\lang3081 
 would be used for "one" or "someone" in such sentences as }{\b\lang3081 quen milyan\'eb leryal\'eb}{\lang3081  "one longed for release" or}{\b\lang3081  quen hant\'eb i yulma}{\lang3081  "someone broke the cup". Presumably }{\b\lang3081 quen}{\lang3081 
 may also receive case endings, e.g. genitive }{\b\lang3081 queno}{\lang3081  "one's" or dative }{\b\lang3081 quenen}{\lang3081  (which in English would often be translated "for you" rather than "for one": }{\b\lang3081 Mati\'eb y\'e1v\'eb n\'e1 m\'e1
ra quenen}{\lang3081 , "eating fruit is good for you" \endash  "you" here meaning "people in general"!)
\par \tab Most Quenya pronouns usually appear as }{\i\lang3081 endings}{\lang3081 , 
and it may be that Tolkien at one stage even reckoned with a pronominal ending for the indefinite pronoun "one". There exists an early "Qenya" text where this meaning seems to be associated with an ending -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081 : }{\b\lang3081 Kild}{
\b\ul\lang3081 o}{\b\lang3081  kirya ninqe}{\lang3081 , translated "a white ship }{\ul\lang3081 one}{\lang3081  saw" (MC:220-221). However, transforming this into LotR-style Quenya would probably require rather more than altering the spelling to }{
\b\lang3081 cildo cirya ninqu\'eb}{\lang3081 : While the two last words would certainly be acceptable, the verb form }{\b\lang3081 kildo}{\lang3081  does not seem to fit Tolkien's later system, and the status of the ending -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081 
 at the LotR stage is highly doubtful. If we aim for LotR-style Quenya, it is certainly much safer to use the indefinite pronoun }{\b\lang3081 quen}{\lang3081  from a post-LotR source.
\par 
\par }{\i\cf2\lang3081 Summary of Lesson Thirteen:}{\lang3081  The Quenya }{\i\lang3081 dative}{\lang3081 
 case identifies indirect objects, the party indirectly affected by a verbal action (often the beneficiary of this action, though the indirect object may also be adversely affected by it). In the singular, the dative ending is -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 
 (when it is to be added to a noun ending in a consonant, a helping vowel -}{\b\lang3081 e}{\lang3081 - is inserted before it). Nouns with nominative plurals in -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081  have dative plurals in -}{\b\lang3081 in}{\lang3081 
; this ending -}{\b\lang3081 in}{\lang3081  is also used in case of nouns which have nominative plurals in -}{\b\lang3081 r}{\lang3081 , so that the dative form corresponding to nominative }{\b\lang3081 Eldar}{\lang3081  is }{\b\lang3081 Eldain}{
\lang3081 . The }{\i\lang3081 dual}{\lang3081  dative ending is -}{\b\lang3081 nt}{\lang3081 , at least in the case of nouns which have nominative dual forms in -}{\b\lang3081 t}{\lang3081 . (Nouns with nominative dual forms in -}{\b\lang3081 u}{
\lang3081  should perhaps have dative dual forms in -}{\b\lang3081 uen}{\lang3081 , if we can put any trust in earlier material where the ending -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  was actually assigned to the genitive case rather than the dative.) \endash  A }{
\i\lang3081 gerund}{\lang3081  is a form of the verb which can function almost like a noun, denoting the corresponding verbal action, but unlike regular verbal nouns, gerunds are still able to take objects. Quenya gerunds are formed with the ending -}{
\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081  (also a general abstract ending); if this suffix is to be added to an A-stem, the final -}{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081  evidently drops out. In the case of verbs in -}{\b\lang3081 ya}{\lang3081 
, this entire ending is apparently omitted before the suffix -}{\b\lang3081 i\'eb}{\lang3081 . English infinitives expressing }{\i\lang3081 purpose}{\lang3081 
 (i.e., infinitives signifying "[in order] to do" something) translate into Quenya as gerunds inflected for dative, e.g. }{\b\lang3081 hirien}{\lang3081  "(in order) to find". \endash  
Quenya has several pronominal endings corresponding to English "we". One of them is -}{\b\lang3081 lm\'eb}{\lang3081 , denoting a "we" that }{\i\lang3081 includes}{\lang3081  the party that is addressed, whereas the ending -}{\b\lang3081 mm\'eb}{
\lang3081  expresses an }{\i\lang3081 exclusive}{\lang3081  "we", used when the speaker addresses a party outside the "we" group that the speaker himself belongs to. \endash  The }{\i\lang3081 indefinite}{\lang3081 
 pronoun "one" or "someone" is in Quenya }{\b\lang3081 quen}{\lang3081 . Presumably it can receive case endings, e.g. genitive }{\b\lang3081 queno}{\lang3081  "one's".
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 VOCABULARY
\par }{\lang3081 In each Vocabulary section, we have first of all introduced a new number. The numbers 1-11 are explicitly mentioned in the }{\i\lang3081 Etymologies}{\lang3081 : }{\b\lang3081 min\'eb}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 atta}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 
neld\'eb}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 canta}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 lemp\'eb}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 enqu\'eb}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 otso}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 tolto}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 nert\'eb}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 cainen}{
\lang3081  and }{\b\lang3081 minqu\'eb}{\lang3081 . The Elvish way of counting, with base 12 instead of 10, would obviously require a word for "twelve" as well \endash  the last of the basic numbers. However, the }{\i\lang3081 Etymologies}{\lang3081 
 does not mention the Quenya word for "twelve", and neither is it attested elsewhere. Etym only cites the primitive }{\i\lang3081 root-word}{\lang3081  for this number: }{\i\lang3081 R\'c1SAT}{\lang3081 . "No other forms are given," Christopher Tolkien 
notes. However, students of Elvish agree that a Quenya word derived from this root would most likely have the form }{\b\lang3081 rasta}{\lang3081  (the complete Primitive Elvish word being something like }{\i\lang3081 r\'e1sat\'e2}{\lang3081 
, the accent mark here indicating stress rather than length). Some writers have used }{\b\lang3081 rasta}{\lang3081  in their own compositions, so it is at least a post-Tolkien Quenya word. To complete our survey of the basic numbers, I have included }{
\b\lang3081 rasta}{\lang3081  in the vocabulary below \endash  but it must be understood that while this is definitely a plausible word, it is not explicitly given in published material. 
\par 
\par ?}{\b\lang3081 rasta}{\lang3081  "twelve"
\par }{\b\lang3081 mahta}{\lang3081 - "to fight"
\par }{\b\lang3081 anta}{\lang3081 - "to give", irregular past tense }{\b\lang3081 \'e1n\'eb}{\lang3081 . }{\fs20\lang3081 (This past tense is listed in a very old source, the }{\i\fs20\lang3081 Qenya Lexicon}{\fs20\lang3081 
 p. 31. It is entirely possible that in Tolkien's later Quenya, the past tense of }{\b\fs20\lang3081 anta}{\fs20\lang3081 - could just as well be regular: }{\b\fs20\lang3081 antan\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 . However, the Sindarin verb form }{\i\fs20\lang3081 
\'f3nen}{\fs20\lang3081  "I gave" occurring in LotR Appendix A would correspond to Quenya }{\b\fs20\lang3081 \'e1nen}{\fs20\lang3081  rather than ?}{\b\fs20\lang3081 antanen}{\fs20\lang3081 . The }{\i\fs20\lang3081 Etymologies}{\fs20\lang3081 , entry }{
\i\fs20\lang3081 ONO}{\fs20\lang3081 , indicates that the past tense of the verb }{\b\fs20\lang3081 onta}{\fs20\lang3081 - "beget, create" may be both }{\b\fs20\lang3081 \'f3n\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  and }{\b\fs20\lang3081 ontan\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 
; perhaps the past tense of }{\b\fs20\lang3081 anta}{\fs20\lang3081 - may likewise be both }{\b\fs20\lang3081 \'e1n\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  and }{\b\fs20\lang3081 antan\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 . We will use the attested form }{\b\fs20\lang3081 \'e1n\'eb}{
\fs20\lang3081  here.)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 suc}{\lang3081 - "to drink"
\par }{\b\lang3081 anna}{\lang3081  "gift"
\par }{\b\lang3081 alass\'eb}{\lang3081  "joy"
\par }{\b\lang3081 hroa}{\lang3081  "body" }{\fs20\lang3081 (related to a word introduced earlier, }{\b\fs20\lang3081 hr\'e1v\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  "flesh"; Tolkien meant them to be descended from Primitive Elvish }{\i\fs20\lang3081 sraw\'e2}{\fs20\lang3081 
 and }{\i\fs20\lang3081 sr\'e2w\'ea}{\fs20\lang3081 , respectively. See MR:350.)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 noa}{\lang3081  "idea"
\par }{\b\lang3081 cala}{\lang3081  "light" }{\fs20\lang3081 (as in }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Calaquendi}{\fs20\lang3081  "Light-elves", }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Calacirya}{\fs20\lang3081 /-}{\b\fs20\lang3081 cilya}{\fs20\lang3081  "Light-cleft")}{\lang3081   
\par }{\b\lang3081 m\'e1ra}{\lang3081  "good" }{\fs20\lang3081 (in the sense of "fit, useful" \endash  Quenya has other words for "good" in the moral sense)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 quen}{\lang3081  indefinite pronoun "one", "someone"
\par }{\b\lang3081 arwa}{\lang3081  adjective "possessing", "in control of", "having", followed by genitive (see note)}{\f1\cgrid0  }{\fs20\lang3081 
\par 
\par NOTE ON }{\b\fs20\lang3081 ARWA}{\fs20\lang3081  "POSSESSING, IN CONTROL OF": This adjective is listed in the }{\i\fs20\lang3081 Etymologies}{\fs20\lang3081 , entry }{\i\fs20\lang3081 3AR}{\fs20\lang3081  (though it is derived from a variant root }{
\i\fs20\lang3081 GAR}{\fs20\lang3081 ). It can be used to form compound adjectives; Tolkien mentioned the example }{\b\fs20\lang3081 aldarwa}{\fs20\lang3081  "having trees" = "tree-grown" (}{\b\fs20\lang3081 alda}{\fs20\lang3081  + }{\b\fs20\lang3081 arwa
}{\fs20\lang3081 , "tree-having"). But apparently }{\b\fs20\lang3081 arwa}{\fs20\lang3081  "having, possessing" can also be used by itself, and then it would be followed by a genitive form. (As we have touched on above, the Quenya genitive ending was -}{
\b\fs20\lang3081 n}{\fs20\lang3081  when Tolkien wrote the }{\i\fs20\lang3081 Etymologies}{\fs20\lang3081 , but we must assume that the rule as such was still valid when he changed the ending to -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 o}{\fs20\lang3081 
 later.) So we may probably have phrases like }{\b\fs20\lang3081 n\'e9r arwa collo}{\fs20\lang3081 , "a man having/possessing a cloak" (}{\b\fs20\lang3081 colla}{\fs20\lang3081  "cloak", genitive }{\b\fs20\lang3081 collo}{\fs20\lang3081 
). Perhaps this may simply be translated "a man }{\i\fs20\lang3081 with}{\fs20\lang3081  a cloak", and if we use }{\b\fs20\lang3081 arwa}{\fs20\lang3081  to mean "with", it would mean that the words for "with" and "without" (}{\b\fs20\lang3081 arwa}{
\fs20\lang3081  and }{\b\fs20\lang3081 \'fa}{\fs20\lang3081 , respectively) are both followed by genitive! Yet }{\b\fs20\lang3081 arwa}{\fs20\lang3081  is said to be an adjective and not a preposition, so }{\b\fs20\lang3081 arwa}{\fs20\lang3081 
 presumably agrees in number, becoming }{\b\fs20\lang3081 arw\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  (for archaic }{\b\fs20\lang3081 arwai}{\fs20\lang3081 ) when pointing back to a plural word: }{\b\fs20\ul\lang3081 Neri}{\b\fs20\lang3081  arw\'eb collo}{\fs20\lang3081 , "
}{\fs20\ul\lang3081 men}{\fs20\lang3081  possessing a cloak", }{\b\fs20\ul\lang3081 Naucor}{\b\fs20\lang3081  arw\'eb harmaron}{\fs20\lang3081  "}{\fs20\ul\lang3081 Dwarves}{\fs20\lang3081  possessing treasures", }{\b\fs20\ul\lang3081 arani}{
\b\fs20\lang3081  arw\'eb ohtarion}{\fs20\lang3081  "}{\fs20\ul\lang3081 kings }{\fs20\lang3081 in control of warriors".}{\lang3081 
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 EXERCISES
\par }{\lang3081 
\par 1. Translate into English: 
\par 
\par }{\i\lang3081 A}{\lang3081 . }{\b\lang3081 I n\'e9r \'e1n\'eb i nissen anna.
\par }{\i\lang3081 B.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Anar anta cala Ambaren.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 C.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Hiruvalm\'eb i harma, ar antuvalmes i rasta Naucoin.}{\i\lang3081 
\par D.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Mati\'eb hr\'e1v\'eb car\'eb quen tiuca, ar umilm\'eb mer\'eb tiuc\'eb hroar, an tiuc\'eb hroar umir vany\'eb.
\par }{\i\lang3081 E.}{\b\lang3081  Lendemm\'eb mir i osto hirien i sail\'eb nissi, an mernemm\'eb cenitat.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 F.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 N\'e9r arwa m\'e1r\'eb noaron n\'e1 saila ar antuva s\'e9r\'eb ar alass\'eb i oston.
\par }{\i\lang3081 G.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Utultiemmet quetien rimb\'eb engwion.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 H. }{\b\lang3081 Suci\'eb limp\'eb um\'eb m\'e1ra queno hroan.
\par }{\lang3081 
\par 2. Translate into Quenya:
\par 
\par }{\i\lang3081 I.}{\lang3081  Someone gave the warrior a great sword.
\par }{\i\lang3081 J. }{\lang3081 Making a house for the boys is a good idea.
\par }{\i\lang3081 K.}{\lang3081  We }{\i\lang3081 (inclusive)}{\lang3081  fight for peace; fighting does not give the people [any] joy, for we }{\i\lang3081 (inclusive)}{\lang3081  have seen the light.
\par }{\i\lang3081 L}{\lang3081 . Speaking the Elven-tongue (}{\b\lang3081 Eldalamb\'eb}{\lang3081 ) is a great joy to Men (}{\b\lang3081 Atani}{\lang3081 ).
\par }{\i\lang3081 M}{\lang3081 . The warriors of the two lands will fight for the [twin] peoples }{\i\lang3081 (dual)}{\lang3081 , and we }{\i\lang3081 (exclusive)}{\lang3081  will go through a great darkness to find light.
\par }{\i\lang3081 N.}{\lang3081  The men having the good wine wanted cups to drink the wine, and the king's thralls gave the men twelve cups of gold.
\par }{\i\lang3081 O}{\lang3081 . We }{\i\lang3081 (exclusive)}{\lang3081  want to go into the city to free all Men (}{\b\lang3081 Atani}{\lang3081 ) and (to) give the gold of the king to the thralls.
\par }{\i\lang3081 P.}{\lang3081  The walls of the city are great; we }{\i\lang3081 (inclusive)}{\lang3081  have made them to protect the people.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs36\cf6\lang3081 LESSON FOURTEEN}{\b\fs32\lang3081 
\par The Allative and Ablative cases. }{\b\i\fs32\lang3081 Equ\'eb}{\b\fs32\lang3081  and }{\b\i\fs32\lang3081 auta:}{\b\fs32\lang3081  two peculiar verbs. Possessive pronominal endings: -}{\b\i\fs32\lang3081 nya}{\b\fs32\lang3081 , -}{\b\i\fs32\lang3081 lya}{
\b\fs32\lang3081 , -}{\b\i\fs32\lang3081 lma}{\b\fs32\lang3081 , -}{\b\i\fs32\lang3081 mma}{\b\fs32\lang3081 .
\par }{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 THE ALLATIVE AND ABLATIVE CASES}{\lang3081 
\par The }{\i\lang3081 dative}{\lang3081  case ending -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  presented in the previous lesson may sometimes correspond to the English preposition "to", as when it is appended to gerunds: }{\b\lang3081 enyalie}{\b\ul\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 
 = "}{\ul\lang3081 to}{\lang3081 
 recall" (UT:317). Yet this is a rather abstract kind of "to"; as we have seen, the Quenya dative may also be translated as phrases involving the preposition "for", or it may simply correspond to a specific English word order.
\par \tab However, Quenya does have a special case form implying "to" in the more basic sense of "towards" or "against"; the Latin term for such a case is }{\i\lang3081 allative}{\lang3081 . The relevant Quenya ending is -}{\b\lang3081 nna}{\lang3081 
: In the entry }{\i\lang3081 Eldanna}{\lang3081  in the UT Index, Christopher Tolkien identifies this ending as a "suffix...of movement towards". The word }{\b\lang3081 Eldanna}{\lang3081 
 itself is not a bad example; it may be translated "Elfwards" and was used by the N\'famenoreans as the name of a bay on the west coast of N\'famenor, thus in the direction of the Blessed Realm whe
re the Eldar dwelt (UT:164). In Elendil's Declaration, repeated by Aragorn at his coronation, the ending -}{\b\lang3081 nna}{\lang3081  carries the full force of "to" with the implication of motion towards: }{\b\lang3081 Et E\'e4rello Endore}{
\b\ul\lang3081 nna}{\b\lang3081  ut\'falien}{\lang3081  = "out of the Great Sea }{\ul\lang3081 to}{\lang3081  Middle-earth [}{\b\lang3081 Endor}{\lang3081 ] I am come." Cf. also the sentence }{\b\lang3081 Sin Quent\'eb Quendingoldo Elendile}{
\b\ul\lang3081 nna}{\lang3081  (PM:401) \endash  apparently meaning "Thus Spoke Quendingoldo }{\ul\lang3081 to}{\lang3081  Elendil" (or perhaps "This Quendingoldo Said }{\ul\lang3081 to}{\lang3081  Elendil"; the meaning of the word }{\b\lang3081 sin}{
\lang3081  is not quite clear). As the allative forms of }{\b\lang3081 cirya}{\lang3081  "ship" and }{\b\lang3081 lass\'eb}{\lang3081  "leaf", the Plotz Letter points to }{\b\lang3081 ciryanna}{\lang3081  "to a ship" and }{\b\lang3081 lassenna}{\lang3081 
 "to a leaf". (Of course, the stress now falls on the vowel of the second-to-last syllable because of the following consonant cluster introduced by the ending -}{\b\lang3081 nna}{\lang3081 : }{\i\lang3081 ciry}{\b\i\ul\lang3081 A}{\i\lang3081 nna}{
\lang3081 , }{\i\lang3081 lass}{\b\i\ul\lang3081 E}{\i\lang3081 nna}{\lang3081 .) So if you want to say "I'll go to the ship" in Quenya, you don't normally use a separate word for "to", but employ the ending -}{\b\lang3081 nna}{\lang3081  instead: }{
\b\lang3081 Lelyuvan i ciryanna}{\lang3081 . 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 While the ending -}{\b\lang3081 nna}{\lang3081  may sometimes be rendered "-wards" in English, e.g. }{\b\lang3081 Elenna}{\lang3081  "Starwards" as a name of N\'fa
menor (see below), the English ending "-wards" cannot be freely applied to any noun like the Quenya ending can. But if the day ever comes when }{\b\lang3081 Columbus lend\'eb Americanna}{\lang3081 
 can be translated "Columbus went Americawards", people thinking this is acceptable English, the language shall have acquired a living allative case.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs20\lang3081 NOTE: Besides -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 nna}{\fs20\lang3081 , there are also traces of an older allative ending in Quenya. In primitive Elvish it had the form -}{\i\fs20\lang3081 da}{\fs20\lang3081 
, later reduced to -}{\i\fs20\lang3081 d}{\fs20\lang3081  (WJ:366). In Quenya, this -}{\i\fs20\lang3081 d}{\fs20\lang3081  became -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 z}{\fs20\lang3081  and later -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 r}{\fs20\lang3081 
, and we have already met it in the word }{\b\fs20\lang3081 mir}{\fs20\lang3081  "into" (this is literally }{\b\fs20\lang3081 mi-r}{\fs20\lang3081  "in-to", cf. }{\b\fs20\lang3081 mi}{\fs20\lang3081 
 "in"!) Since this ending came to clash with the plural ending -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 r}{\fs20\lang3081 , as in }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Eldar}{\fs20\lang3081 , it only survived in a handful of words indicating motion }{\i\fs20\lang3081 to}{\fs20\lang3081  or }{
\i\fs20\lang3081 towards}{\fs20\lang3081  a point. Attested examples include }{\b\fs20\lang3081 tar}{\fs20\lang3081  "thither", }{\b\fs20\lang3081 oar}{\fs20\lang3081  "away", }{\b\fs20\lang3081 yar}{\fs20\lang3081  "to whom" and }{\b\fs20\lang3081 mir}{
\fs20\lang3081  "into". Actually "into" can also be }{\b\fs20\lang3081 minna}{\fs20\lang3081  with the normal, "modern" allative ending -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 nna}{\fs20\lang3081 . Likewise, "thither" can be }{\b\fs20\lang3081 tanna}{\fs20\lang3081 
 as well as }{\b\fs20\lang3081 tar}{\fs20\lang3081 .
\par }{\lang3081 \tab In the }{\i\lang3081 plural}{\lang3081 , the ending -}{\b\lang3081 nna}{\lang3081  changes to -}{\b\lang3081 nnar}{\lang3081 , hence }{\b\lang3081 lassennar}{\lang3081  "to leaves" and }{\b\lang3081 ciryannar}{\lang3081  "to ships" (e.g. 
}{\b\lang3081 lelyuvan i ciryannar}{\lang3081  "I'll go to the ships"). The final -}{\b\lang3081 r}{\lang3081  here appearing seems to be the same plural element that we are familiar with from the nominative.
\par 
\par Since Quenya may express "to, towards" by means of a case ending, the question naturally arises whether there is an ending for "from" as well. There is.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 As we pointed out in Lesson 11, the genitive ending -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  may occasionally take on this meaning, as in one word in }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081 : }{\b\lang3081 
Oioloss\'eb}{\b\ul\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  = "}{\ul\lang3081 from}{\lang3081  Oioloss\'eb" (Mount Everwhite). However, the idea of "from" is more regularly expressed by the }{\i\lang3081 ablative}{\lang3081  case, which is marked by the ending -}{
\b\lang3081 llo}{\lang3081 . According to Plotz, we can have forms like }{\b\lang3081 lassello}{\lang3081  "from a leaf" and }{\b\lang3081 ciryallo}{\lang3081 
 "from a ship" (again accented on the second-to-last syllable, of course). So we may build sentences like }{\b\lang3081 tulin i ciryallo}{\lang3081  "I come from the ship". For a Tolkien-made example, cf. the phrase }{\b\lang3081 m\'e9tima hresta}{
\b\ul\lang3081 llo}{\lang3081  "}{\ul\lang3081 from}{\lang3081  the last shore" in the Markirya poem. Both the ablative and the allative cases are exemplified in the phrase }{\b\lang3081 telme}{\b\cf6\lang3081 llo}{\b\lang3081  talma}{\b\cf2\lang3081 nna}
{\lang3081  "}{\cf6\lang3081 from}{\lang3081  hood [}{\b\lang3081 telm\'eb}{\lang3081 ] }{\cf2\lang3081 to}{\lang3081  base [}{\b\lang3081 talma}{\lang3081 ]", that is, "from top to bottom". (In the entry }{\i\lang3081 TEL}{\lang3081  of the }{
\i\lang3081 Etymologies}{\lang3081  as reproduced in LR, this expression is actually cited as "}{\i\lang3081 telmello t}{\i\ul\lang3081 e}{\i\lang3081 lmanna}{\lang3081 ", but this is plainly a typo, for as is evident from the entry }{\i\lang3081 TAL}{
\lang3081 , the word for "base, foundation, root" is not }{\b\lang3081 telma}{\lang3081 , but }{\b\lang3081 talma}{\lang3081 .)
\par As for the }{\i\lang3081 plural}{\lang3081  form of the ablative, there are apparently several options. Just like the suffix -}{\b\lang3081 nna}{\lang3081  for allative turns into -}{\b\lang3081 nnar}{\lang3081  in the plural, the ablative ending -}{
\b\lang3081 llo}{\lang3081  may have a plural equivalent -}{\b\lang3081 llor}{\lang3081 : In the Markirya poem, Tolkien used }{\b\lang3081 elenillor}{\lang3081  as the plural ablative of }{\b\lang3081 elen}{\lang3081  "star", hence "f
rom stars". However, according to the Plotz letter, the plural ablative is to have the ending in -}{\b\lang3081 llon}{\lang3081  instead. Here we have the same plural marker -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  as in the ending -}{\b\lang3081 on}{\lang3081 
 for plural genitive (the basic genitive ending -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  + the plural sign -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 , WJ:407). One of Tolkien's earlier tables of Quenya case endings lists both -}{\b\lang3081 llor}{\lang3081  and -}{\b\lang3081 llon
}{\lang3081  as possible plural ablative endings. So "I come from the ships" could evidently be both }{\b\lang3081 tulin i ciryallor}{\lang3081  and }{\b\lang3081 tulin i ciryallon}{\lang3081 . I generally prefer -}{\b\lang3081 llon}{\lang3081 
, the Plotz variant, since the Plotz letter is our best late source regarding the Quenya case system \endash  but -}{\b\lang3081 llor}{\lang3081  must be considered a valid alternative.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 Dual allative/ablative:}{\lang3081  The }{\i\lang3081 dual}{\lang3081  forms of the allative and ablative endings include the already-familiar dual element -}{\b\lang3081 t}{\lang3081 , which replaces one of the consonants of the suffixes -}
{\b\lang3081 nna}{\lang3081  and -}{\b\lang3081 llo}{\lang3081  to produce -}{\b\lang3081 nta}{\lang3081  and -}{\b\lang3081 lto}{\lang3081  instead. Thus the nominative }{\b\lang3081 ciryat}{\lang3081 
 "two ships, a couple of ships" corresponds to an allative form }{\b\lang3081 ciryanta}{\lang3081  "to(wards) a couple of ships" and an ablative form }{\b\lang3081 ciryalto}{\lang3081  
"from a couple of ships". These are the examples Tolkien used in the Plotz letter, but again it is uncertain whether the same endings would be suffixed to a noun that forms its nominative dual in -}{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081  rather than -}{\b\lang3081 t}{
\lang3081 . Still using }{\b\lang3081 Aldu}{\lang3081  as our standard example, should "to the Two Trees" be }{\b\lang3081 Aldunta}{\lang3081  or simply }{\b\lang3081 Aldunna}{\lang3081 ? Similarly, should "from the Two Trees" be }{\b\lang3081 Aldulto}{
\lang3081  or simply }{\b\lang3081 Aldullo}{\lang3081 ? I tend to think of }{\b\lang3081 Aldunna}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 Aldullo}{\lang3081  as the likeliest forms, but lacking attested examples we cannot be sure.
\par 
\par }{\i\lang3081 Additional shades of meaning of the Allative and Ablative cases:}{\lang3081  While the primary implication of these cases is "to(wards)" and "from", they may have other shades of meaning as well.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 The idea of actual, physical motion towards or from something is not always present. Notice the use of the ablative in a phrase found in }{\i\lang3081 J.R.R. Tolkien \endash 
 Artist and Illustrator}{\lang3081 : }{\b\lang3081 Itarild\'eb Ondolindello}{\lang3081 , "Itarild\'eb from Ondolind\'eb", or using the better-known Sindarin forms: Idril from Gondolin. In English, this is best rendered Idril }{\i\lang3081 of}{\lang3081 
 Gondolin, identifying Idril as a person living in Gondolin; the Quenya wording may not necessarily imply that Idril had actually }{\i\lang3081 left}{\lang3081 
 Gondolin. Possibly, the ablative can also be used in other ways that carry no implication of motion. It may be noted that regarding the Quenya verb }{\b\lang3081 ruc}{\lang3081 
- "to feel fear or horror", Tolkien wrote that it is "constructed with 'from' of the object feared" (WJ:415). He did not provide any further information or examples, but "from" is regularly expressed by the ablative 
case in Quenya. So given that the Quenya word for "monster" is }{\b\lang3081 ulundo}{\lang3081 , perhaps "I fear the monster" would translate something like }{\b\lang3081 rucin i ulundollo}{\lang3081 
. (Insofar as the words "from" and "of" express related meanings, this may be compared to such an English wording as "I'm afraid }{\ul\lang3081 of}{\lang3081  the monster".)
\par As for the allative, it does not always mean "to(wards)", but may also imply "on, upon": The meanings are related insofar as an object that rests "upon" something also presses "towards" it, though there is no actual m
otion. This use of the allative may typically occur in connection with the verb }{\b\lang3081 caita}{\lang3081 - "lie", as in this sentence from the prose }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081 : }{\b\lang3081 Morni\'eb caita i falmali}{\b\ul\lang3081 
nnar}{\lang3081 , "darkness lies }{\ul\lang3081 on}{\lang3081  the foaming waves" (}{\b\lang3081 falma}{\lang3081  "foaming wave", here not only with the plural allative ending -}{\b\lang3081 nnar}{\lang3081  but also the "partitive plural" marker -}{
\b\lang3081 li}{\lang3081 , in this context possibly implying a great number of waves: In his interlinear translation in RGEO:67, Tolkien analyzed }{\b\lang3081 falma-}{\b\cf2\lang3081 li}{\b\lang3081 -}{\b\cf6\lang3081 nnar}{\lang3081  as "foaming waves-
}{\cf2\lang3081 many}{\lang3081 -}{\cf6\lang3081 upon}{\lang3081 "). Further examples of allative forms implying "on, upon" are found in the Markirya poem; we have }{\b\lang3081 atalanti\'eb mindoni}{\b\ul\lang3081 nnar}{\lang3081  (or, }{\b\lang3081 
mindo}{\b\ul\lang3081 nnar}{\lang3081 ) "}{\ul\lang3081 upon}{\lang3081  fallen towers" and }{\b\lang3081 axor ilcala}{\b\ul\lang3081 nnar}{\lang3081  "}{\ul\lang3081 on}{\lang3081  bones gleaming".
\par However, the student should also notice that while the allative and ablative cases may not always imply physical motion to or from something, their basic meanings of "to, towards" and "from" may also be }{\i\lang3081 strengthened}{\lang3081 
. Instead of just indicating motion "towards" something, the allative may also suggest motion "into" it: Attested examples include }{\b\lang3081 \'ebari lantier cilya}{\b\ul\lang3081 nna}{\lang3081  "seas fell }{\ul\lang3081 into}{\lang3081 
 a chasm" (LR:56) and }{\b\lang3081 ma}{\b\ul\lang3081 nnar}{\b\lang3081  Valion}{\lang3081  "}{\ul\lang3081 into}{\lang3081  the hands of the Vali [Valar]" (F\'edriel's Song). The ablative may likewise indicate moti
on "out of" something rather than merely "from" it: The word }{\b\lang3081 sindan\'f3rie}{\b\ul\lang3081 llo}{\lang3081  occurring in }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081  Tolkien translated "}{\ul\lang3081 out of}{\lang3081 
 a grey country" (though in the interlinear analysis in RGEO:67, he broke it down as }{\b\lang3081 sinda-n\'f3rie-}{\b\ul\lang3081 llo}{\lang3081 , "grey-country-}{\ul\lang3081 from}{\lang3081 ").
\par These additional uses of the allative and ablative cases may lead to some ambiguities: Is }{\b\lang3081 lenden i coa}{\b\ul\lang3081 nna}{\lang3081  to be interpreted "I went }{\ul\lang3081 to}{\lang3081  the house" or "I went }{\ul\lang3081 into}{
\lang3081  the house"? Where confusion may arise, it is probably best to use the independent word }{\b\lang3081 mir}{\lang3081  (or }{\b\lang3081 minna}{\lang3081 ) if "into" is the desired meaning: }{\b\lang3081 Lenden mir}{\lang3081 /}{\b\lang3081 
minna i coa}{\lang3081 . As for "out of" as opposed to merely "from", Elendil's Declaration demonstrates that the word }{\b\lang3081 et}{\lang3081  "out" can be placed in front of an ablative form to clarify the meaning: }{\b\lang3081 Et E\'e4rello...ut
\'falien}{\lang3081 , "out of [or, out from] the Great Sea I am come." Some would even analyze }{\b\lang3081 et}{\lang3081  "out" as a preposition governing the ablative case (like }{\b\lang3081 \'fa}{\lang3081  "without" governs the genitive case).

\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 Adding the allative and ablative endings to nouns ending in a consonant:}{\lang3081  Suffixes like -}{\b\lang3081 nna}{\lang3081  and -}{\b\lang3081 llo}{\lang3081 
 and their dual/plural variants can never be added directly to a noun ending in a consonant without creating impossible consonant clusters. For instance, the allative "to Elendil" cannot be **}{\b\lang3081 Elendilnna}{\lang3081 
, for Quenya phonology does not permit the group "lnn". As is evident from the actual form }{\b\lang3081 Elendilenna}{\lang3081  occurring in PM:401, the language may work around this problem by inserting a connecting vowel }{\b\lang3081 e}{\lang3081 
 before the case ending. The ablative and allative forms occurring in Elendil's Declaration in LotR may be examples of the same: }{\b\lang3081 et E\'e4r}{\b\ul\lang3081 e}{\b\lang3081 llo}{\lang3081  "out of the Great Sea" (}{\b\lang3081 E\'e4r}{
\lang3081 : Quenya name of the Ocean), }{\b\lang3081 Endor}{\b\ul\lang3081 e}{\b\lang3081 nna}{\lang3081  "to Middle-earth" (}{\b\lang3081 Endor}{\lang3081 : Quenya for "Mid-land" = "Middle-earth"). However, the word }{\b\lang3081 E\'e4r}{\lang3081 
 is also cited in the form }{\b\lang3081 E\'e4r\'eb}{\lang3081  (SD:305), and }{\b\lang3081 Endor}{\lang3081  is shortened from an older form }{\b\lang3081 End\'f3r\'eb}{\lang3081 , so we cannot be absolutely certain that the }{\b\lang3081 e}{\lang3081 
's occurring before the case endings in the forms }{\b\lang3081 E\'e4r}{\b\ul\lang3081 e}{\b\lang3081 llo}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 Endor}{\b\ul\lang3081 e}{\b\lang3081 nna}{\lang3081 
 are not simply part of the nouns proper. On the other hand, the example }{\b\lang3081 Elendil}{\b\ul\lang3081 e}{\b\lang3081 nna}{\lang3081  almost certainly includes a connecting vowel }{\b\lang3081 e}{\lang3081 
, for there is no reason to assume that the name }{\b\lang3081 Elendil}{\lang3081  ever ended in -}{\b\lang3081 \'eb}{\lang3081 . So the main strategy for avoiding unwanted consonant clusters before case endings is probably to insert an -}{\b\lang3081 e}{
\lang3081 - before the ending.
\par \tab It should be noted, though, that in the case of a }{\i\lang3081 plural}{\lang3081  noun requiring a connecting vowel, it seems that -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 - rather than -}{\b\lang3081 e}{\lang3081 
- is preferred. We have already mentioned that in the Markirya poem, Tolkien used }{\b\lang3081 elenillor}{\lang3081  as the plural ablative form of }{\b\lang3081 elen}{\lang3081  "star". If effect, the pl. ablative ending -}{\b\lang3081 llor}{\lang3081 
 has been added to the nominative plural }{\b\lang3081 eleni}{\lang3081 . One version of the Markirya poem also had }{\b\lang3081 mindoninnar}{\lang3081 
 as the pl. allative "upon towers" (before Tolkien decided to go for a contracted form instead; see below). Here, the pl. allative ending has been added to the nominative plural }{\b\lang3081 mindoni}{\lang3081  "towers". 
\par }{\fs20\lang3081 NOTE: Notice, though, that nouns in -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 \'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  with nominative plurals in -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 i}{\fs20\lang3081  (e.g. }{\b\fs20\lang3081 lass\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  "leaf", pl. }{\b\fs20\lang3081 lassi}{
\fs20\lang3081 ) do }{\i\fs20\lang3081 not}{\fs20\lang3081  change their final -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 \'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  to -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 i}{\fs20\lang3081  before -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 nnar}{\fs20\lang3081  or -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 llon}{
\fs20\lang3081 /-}{\b\fs20\lang3081 llor}{\fs20\lang3081  is suffixed: Plotz indicates that the pl. allative and ablative forms of }{\b\fs20\lang3081 lass\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  are }{\b\fs20\lang3081 lassennar}{\fs20\lang3081  and }{\b\fs20\lang3081 
lassellon}{\fs20\lang3081 , respectively \endash  }{\i\fs20\lang3081 not}{\fs20\lang3081  **}{\b\fs20\lang3081 lassinnar}{\fs20\lang3081 , **}{\b\fs20\lang3081 lassillon}{\fs20\lang3081 
. In this respect, the allative and ablative cases differ from the genitive case: A noun that forms its nominative plural in -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 i}{\fs20\lang3081  }{\i\fs20\lang3081 always}{\fs20\lang3081 
 receives this ending before the genitive plural ending -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 on}{\fs20\lang3081  is added \endash  the genitive plural of }{\b\fs20\lang3081 lass\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  being }{\b\fs20\lang3081 lassion}{\fs20\lang3081 , not **}{
\b\fs20\lang3081 lass\'ebon}{\fs20\lang3081 .
\par }{\lang3081 \tab If one does not insert any connecting vowel, another way of getting rid of an unwanted consonant cluster is to simply }{\i\lang3081 omit the final consonant}{\lang3081 
 of the noun that is to receive a case ending. Especially where the final consonant of the noun is identical to the first consonant of the case ending, these two consonants may simply merge. As indicated above, Tolkien first used }{\b\lang3081 mindoninnar
}{\lang3081  as the plural allative of }{\b\lang3081 mindon}{\lang3081  "tower". But then he decided to drop the connecting vowel intruding before -}{\b\lang3081 nnar}{\lang3081  and introduced a contracted form instead: }{\b\lang3081 Mindonnar}{
\lang3081 , which simply represents }{\i\lang3081 mindon-nnar}{\lang3081 . As we see, the final -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  of }{\b\lang3081 mindon}{\lang3081  merges with the first }{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  of the ending -}{\b\lang3081 nnar}{
\lang3081 . A more-well known example is }{\b\lang3081 Elenna}{\lang3081  (for }{\i\lang3081 Elen-nna}{\lang3081 ) as a name of N\'famenor: After following the Star of E\'e4
rendil across the ocean to their new land, the Edain "called that land Elenna, which is Starwards" (}{\i\lang3081 Akallab\'eath}{\lang3081 ; cf. UT:317: }{\b\lang3081 Elenna\'b7n\'f3r\'eb}{\lang3081 
 = "the land named Starwards"). In a similar fashion, perhaps the }{\i\lang3081 ablative}{\lang3081  of }{\b\lang3081 Menel}{\lang3081  "heaven" could \endash  or even should \endash  be }{\b\lang3081 Menello}{\lang3081  (for }{\i\lang3081 Menel-llo}{
\lang3081 ) rather than }{\b\lang3081 Menelello}{\lang3081 .
\par }{\fs20\lang3081 NOTE: We may wonder how certain nouns with special stem-forms would be treated. In the case of }{\b\fs20\lang3081 talan}{\fs20\lang3081 , }{\b\fs20\lang3081 talam}{\fs20\lang3081 
- "floor", the allative "to a floor" or "(up)on a floor" might probably be expressed as }{\b\fs20\lang3081 talamenna}{\fs20\lang3081  with a connecting vowel inserted (the ablative should almost certainly be }{\b\fs20\lang3081 talamello}{\fs20\lang3081 
), but perhaps we could also start from }{\b\fs20\lang3081 talan}{\fs20\lang3081  and use }{\b\fs20\lang3081 talanna}{\fs20\lang3081  (for }{\i\fs20\lang3081 talan-nna}{\fs20\lang3081 ) as the allative form? And what about a noun like }{\b\fs20\lang3081 
toron}{\fs20\lang3081 , }{\b\fs20\lang3081 torn}{\fs20\lang3081 - "brother"? Should "to a brother" be }{\b\fs20\lang3081 tornenna}{\fs20\lang3081  with a connecting vowel }{\b\fs20\lang3081 e}{\fs20\lang3081  inserted betw
een the stem-form and the case ending, or may we simply say }{\b\fs20\lang3081 toronna}{\fs20\lang3081  for }{\i\fs20\lang3081 toron-nna}{\fs20\lang3081 
? At this stage, we cannot know what Tolkien would have accepted as correct Quenya. I would not reject any of these alternatives as wrong.}{\fs20 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 It seems that the final -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  of the four directions }{\b\lang3081 Formen}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 Hyarmen}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 R\'f3men}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 N
\'famen}{\lang3081  "North, South, East, West" quite regularly drops out before the case endings for allative, ablative and locative (the locative case will be discussed in the next lesson). One haven in the east of N\'famenor was called }{\b\lang3081 R
\'f3menna}{\lang3081 , literally "Eastwards" (see its entry in the UT index, and cf. LR:47) \endash  clearly because ships sailed eastwards from it. Of course, }{\i\lang3081 R\'f3men-nna}{\lang3081  > }{\b\lang3081 R\'f3menna}{\lang3081 
 as such is just another example of a final consonant of a noun merging with the first consonant of the case ending because they happen to be identical. However, }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081  provides }{\b\lang3081 R\'f3mello}{\lang3081 
 "from the East" as the ablative of }{\b\lang3081 R\'f3men}{\lang3081  "East", and here there can be no doubt that the final -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  has been omitted to avoid the impossible form **}{\b\lang3081 R\'f3menllo}{\lang3081 . It may b
e that }{\b\lang3081 R\'f3men}{\b\ul\lang3081 e}{\b\lang3081 llo}{\lang3081 
 with a connecting vowel inserted would also be a valid form, but as I said, contracted forms seem to be normal when the words for four basic directions are to be inflected for allative or ablative.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
\par }{\b\i\cf2\lang3081 EQU\'cb}{\b\cf2\lang3081  AND }{\b\i\cf2\lang3081 AUTA}{\b\cf2\lang3081 : TWO PECULIAR VERBS
\par }{\lang1033 \'a4 }{\i\lang3081 The verb }{\b\i\lang3081 equ\'eb}{\i\lang3081 : }{\lang3081 We have earlier introduced the Quenya word for "say" or "speak": }{\b\lang3081 quet}{\lang3081 - (aorist }{\b\lang3081 quet\'eb}{\lang3081 , present tense }{
\b\lang3081 qu\'e9ta}{\lang3081 , past tense }{\b\lang3081 quent\'eb}{\lang3081 ). Yet this verb is not always used; there is an alternative word that may be used to introduce quotations. In WJ:392, Tolkien refers to
\par 
\par }\pard \li705\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 ...a curious and evidently archaic form that survives only in the languages of Aman: [primitive] *}{\i\lang3081 ekw\'ea}{\lang3081 , Q[uenya] }{\i\lang3081 eque}{\lang3081 , T[elerin] }{
\i\lang3081 epe}{\lang3081 . It has no tense forms...being mostly used before either a proper name (sg. or pl.) or a full independent pronoun, in the senses }{\i\lang3081 say}{\lang3081  / }{\i\lang3081 says}{\lang3081  or }{\i\lang3081 said}{\lang3081 
. A quotation then follows, either direct, or less usually indirect after a 'that'-conjunction [e.g., "Galadriel said that she wants to go to Middle-earth"]
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
\par So as far as inflection is concerned, this }{\b\lang3081 equ\'eb}{\lang3081  may well be the simplest verb in the entire language. "It has no tense forms", so }{\b\lang3081 equ\'eb}{\lang3081  may be interpreted either as a past tense "said" or as pr
esent tense "say(s)", depending on the context (perhaps it could even cover the future tense "shall say"!) It is used mainly where the subject is a }{\i\lang3081 full independent pronoun}{\lang3081  (to be discussed later in this course) or a }{
\i\lang3081 proper name}{\lang3081  (not a common noun). Also notice the word order indicated by Tolkien: The word }{\b\lang3081 equ\'eb}{\lang3081  comes }{\i\lang3081 before}{\lang3081 
 its subject. Tolkien gave us no actual sentences containing the word }{\b\lang3081 equ\'eb}{\lang3081 , but based on the information he provided, something like the following must be possible:
\par 
\par \tab }{\b\lang3081 Equ\'eb Elendil: "Et E\'e4rello Endorenna ut\'falien."
\par \tab }{\lang3081 Elendil says/said: "Out of the Great Sea to Middle-earth I am come."
\par 
\par Tolkien glossed }{\b\lang3081 equ\'eb}{\lang3081  not only as "says", but also as "say". Since "say" must be understood as a plural verb in English, it seems that unlike normal verbs, }{\b\lang3081 equ\'eb}{\lang3081  does }{\i\lang3081 not}{\lang3081 
 receive the ending -}{\b\lang3081 r}{\lang3081  even where it has a plural subject or more than one subject. Notice that Tolkien stated that }{\b\lang3081 equ\'eb}{\lang3081 
 is typically "used before...a proper name (sg. or pl.)". Now proper names normally don't appear in the plural (except in sentences like "there are many Johns in this town"), so when Tolkien speaks of "pl." proper names, he probably means }{\i\lang3081 
several}{\lang3081  proper names occurring together. So we must assume that a sentence like this would be acceptable:
\par 
\par \tab }{\b\lang3081 Equ\'eb Altariel ar Teleporno: "Ut\'faliemm\'eb Valinorello."
\par }{\lang3081 \tab Altariel and Teleporno [Galadriel and Celeborn] say/said: "We have come from Valinor."
\par 
\par Tolkien indicated that }{\b\lang3081 equ\'eb}{\lang3081  rarely received suffixes of any kind, usually not even pronominal endings (WJ:392), though forms like }{\b\lang3081 eque}{\b\cf6\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  "said }{\cf6\lang3081 I}{\lang3081 " may a
lso occur (WJ:415).
\par \tab It cannot be }{\i\lang3081 wrong}{\lang3081  to replace }{\b\lang3081 equ\'eb}{\lang3081  with a form of the verb }{\b\lang3081 quet}{\lang3081 -, complete with all the normal inflections (}{\b\lang3081 Elendil quet\'eb}{\lang3081 /}{\b\lang3081 
quent\'eb}{\lang3081 ... "Elendil says/said...",  }{\b\lang3081 Altariel ar Teleporno quetir}{\lang3081 /}{\b\lang3081 quenter...}{\lang3081  "Galadriel and Celeborn say/said...") Where the subject is }{\i\lang3081 not}{\lang3081 
 a proper name or a full independent pronoun, it would seem that a form of }{\b\lang3081 quet}{\lang3081 - is usually to be preferred: }{\b\lang3081 I n\'eds quent\'eb}{\lang3081 
... "the woman said..." Perhaps word order is also significant. Tolkien seems to be saying that }{\b\lang3081 equ\'eb}{\lang3081  is used to introduce a }{\i\lang3081 following}{\lang3081  quotation; if the speaker and the act of speaking is mentioned }{
\i\lang3081 after}{\lang3081  the quotation, it is perhaps better to use a form of }{\b\lang3081 quet}{\lang3081 -, e.g.
\par 
\par \tab }{\b\lang3081 Equ\'eb Elendil: "Ut\'falien."}{\lang3081  = Elendil said: "I am come."
\par \tab }{\i\lang3081 but:}{\lang3081 
\par \tab "}{\b\lang3081 Ut\'falien," Elendil quent\'eb}{\lang3081  = "I am come," Elendil said.
\par 
\par Also where no direct or indirect quotation is included in the sentence at all, it is probably best to use a form of }{\b\lang3081 quet}{\lang3081 -. Cf. the attested example }{\b\lang3081 Sin Quent\'eb Quendingoldo Elendilenna}{\lang3081 
 referred to above (PM:401) \endash  apparently meaning "Thus Spoke Quendingoldo [= Pengolodh] to Elendil". Perhaps }{\b\lang3081 quent\'eb}{\lang3081  could have been replaced by }{\b\lang3081 equ\'eb}{\lang3081  here as well \endash  but probably not.

\par 
\par }{\lang1033 \'a4 }{\i\lang3081 The verb }{\b\i\lang3081 auta}{\i\lang3081 -:}{\lang3081  This verb means "pass" or "go away, leave (the point of the speaker's thought)" (WJ:366). Readers of the }{\i\lang3081 Silmarillion}{\lang3081 
 will have encountered it in chapter 20, as part of a battle-cry: }{\b\lang3081 Auta i l\'f3m\'eb!}{\lang3081  "The night is passing!"
\par \tab According to the rules so far set out in the course, this verb is quite irregular, though Tolkien may not have thought of it that way: In WJ:366 he refers to its various "regular forms". Anyway, the past tense of }{\b\lang3081 auta}{\lang3081 
- is not **}{\b\lang3081 autan\'eb}{\lang3081  as we might expect. There are actually several possible past tense forms. One of them is }{\b\lang3081 anw\'eb}{\lang3081 , formed by nasal-infixion of the primitive root-word }{\i\lang3081 AWA}{\lang3081 
; the ending -}{\b\lang3081 ta}{\lang3081  seen in }{\b\lang3081 auta}{\lang3081 - (primitive ?}{\i\lang3081 awat\'e2}{\lang3081 -) does not appear at all in this past tense form. However, the form }{\b\lang3081 anw\'eb}{\lang3081 
 was "only found in archaic language", so we will concentrate on the "modern" forms instead.
\par \tab There are }{\i\lang3081 two}{\lang3081  sets of past and perfect forms of the verb }{\b\lang3081 auta}{\lang3081 
-, with somewhat different shades of meaning. If the meaning is "went away" in a purely physical sense, about someone leaving one place and going to another, the past tense form }{\b\lang3081 oant\'eb}{\lang3081 
 is used. According to Tolkien, this form is "regular for a -}{\i\lang3081 ta}{\lang3081  verb of this class" (though most verbs in -}{\b\lang3081 ta}{\lang3081  seem to form their past tense simply by adding the ending -}{\b\lang3081 n\'eb}{\lang3081 
). The past tense is supposed to descend from }{\i\lang3081 awant\'ea}{\lang3081 , evidently a nasal-infixed form of }{\i\lang3081 awat\'e2}{\lang3081 , and in Quenya, these words regularly developed into }{\b\lang3081 oant\'eb}{\lang3081  and }{
\b\lang3081 auta}{\lang3081 , respectively. (For the shift }{\i\lang3081 awa}{\lang3081  > }{\b\lang3081 oa}{\lang3081 , cf. one word introduced in the previous lesson: }{\b\lang3081 hroa}{\lang3081  "body", which Tolkien derived from primitive }{
\i\lang3081 sraw\'e2}{\lang3081 .) \endash  The }{\i\lang3081 perfect}{\lang3081  tense of }{\b\lang3081 auta}{\lang3081 - used in the same "physical" sense is }{\b\lang3081 oanti\'eb}{\lang3081 
 = "has gone away [to another place]". This perfect form is obviously influenced by the past tense }{\b\lang3081 oant\'eb}{\lang3081 . Tolkien noticed that the form }{\b\lang3081 oanti\'eb}{\lang3081  shows "intrusion of }{\i\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 
 from the past [tense form]" (WJ:366): Normally, nasal-infixion does not occur in the perfect tense.}{\lang1033 
\par \tab The other set of past and perfect forms of the verb }{\b\lang1033 auta}{\lang1033 - seems no less irregular. The alternative past tense is }{\b\lang1033 v\'e1n\'eb}{\lang1033 , the perfect }{\b\lang1033 av\'e1ni\'eb}{\lang1033 
. The first syllable of }{\b\lang1033 v\'e1n\'eb}{\lang1033  is apparently the Quenya descendant of the stem }{\i\lang1033 w\'e2}{\lang1033  (WJ:366, apparently another manifestation of }{\i\lang1033 AWA}{\lang1033 ), whereas the ending -}{\b\lang1033 n
\'eb}{\lang1033  must be simply the normal past tense ending. (Again, the perfect form seems influenced by the past tense form \endash  the }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  of }{\b\lang1033 v\'e1}{\b\ul\lang1033 n}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033 
 sneaking into the perfect }{\b\lang1033 av\'e1}{\b\ul\lang1033 n}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033 .) 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 The form }{\b\lang1033 v\'e1n\'eb}{\lang1033  and the corresponding perfect }{\b\lang1033 av\'e1ni\'eb}{\lang1033  have acquired a more "abstract" meaning than the forms }{\b\lang1033 oant\'eb}{
\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 oanti\'eb}{\lang1033 . }{\b\lang1033 V\'e1n\'eb}{\lang1033  does }{\i\lang1033 not}{\lang1033  mean "went away (to another place)", but rather "disappeared", "passed". The perfect }{\b\lang1033 av\'e1ni\'eb}{\lang1033 
 occurs (with the plural ending -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 ) in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 , in the sentence }{\b\lang1033 y\'e9ni ve lint\'eb yuldar }{\b\ul\lang1033 av\'e1nier}{\lang1033  = "long years }{\ul\lang1033 have passed}{\lang1033 
 like swift draughts". This sentence nicely illustrates the meaning of this perfect form, for obviously the meaning is not that the }{\b\lang1033 y\'e9ni}{\lang1033  or "long years" have gone away to another place (sc. }{\b\lang1033 oantier}{\lang1033 
!) They "long years" have simply passed, and now they are gone. Where the subject is more tangible than "long years", the forms }{\b\lang1033 v\'e1n\'eb}{\lang1033 /}{\b\lang1033 av\'e1ni\'eb}{\lang1033  would imply that the subject has }{\i\lang1033 
disappeared}{\lang1033 , is }{\i\lang1033 lost}{\lang1033 , has }{\i\lang1033 died off}{\lang1033  etc.
\par  Indeed Tolkien indicated that the meaning of }{\b\lang1033 v\'e1n\'eb}{\lang1033 /}{\b\lang1033 av\'e1ni\'eb}{\lang1033  was influenced by the related word }{\b\lang1033 vanwa}{\lang1033  "gone", "lost", "vanished", "past and over". It occurs twice in }{
\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 : }{\b\lang1033 S\'ed vanwa n\'e1, R\'f3mello vanwa, Valimar}{\lang1033  = "now lost, lost [to those] from the East, is Valimar". In WJ:366, Tolkien calls }{\b\lang1033 vanwa}{\lang1033  the "past participle" of }{
\b\lang1033 auta}{\lang1033 -, though it obviously has no connection with the past or passive participles we have discussed earlier in this course (constructed with the ending -}{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 ina}{\lang1033 ). Th
ere is some evidence for an alternative, rarer participle in -}{\b\lang1033 nwa}{\lang1033 . However, for all intents and purposes, it matters little whether we call }{\b\lang1033 vanwa}{\lang1033 
 a participle or merely a verbal adjective (as does Nancy Martsch in her }{\i\lang1033 Basic Quenya}{\lang1033 ). 
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs20\lang1033 NOTE 1: As pointed out in Lesson Eight, it may well be that when Tolkien wrote }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033 , he thought of the word }{\b\fs20\lang1033 av\'e1nier}{
\fs20\lang1033  as the perfect form of a verb listed in the }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Etymologies}{\fs20\lang1033 : }{\b\fs20\lang1033 vanya}{\fs20\lang1033 - "go, depart, disappear" (see the entry }{\i\fs20\lang1033 WAN}{\fs20\lang1033 
). We should still accept Tolkien's post-LotR ideas about the verb }{\b\fs20\lang1033 auta}{\fs20\lang1033 -; it occurs, after all, in such a primary source as the }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\fs20\lang1033 . Interestingly, the adjectival word }{
\b\fs20\lang1033 vanwa}{\fs20\lang1033  "gone, lost, over" is found already in the }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Qenya Lexicon}{\fs20\lang1033  of 1915 (QL:99) and was retained throughout all stages of Tolkien's development of Quenya. 
\par }{\lang1033 
\par }{\fs20\lang1033 NOTE 2: In the }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Etymologies}{\fs20\lang1033 , entry }{\i\fs20\lang1033 GAWA}{\fs20\lang1033 , a quite distinct verb }{\b\fs20\lang1033 auta}{\fs20\lang1033 - "to invent" is listed. It would seem that the later verb }{
\b\fs20\lang1033 auta}{\fs20\lang1033 - "go away" did not exist at the time Tolkien wrote Etym. If we nonetheless accept both verbs as valid Quenya, we can distinguish between them in some tenses, for }{\b\fs20\lang1033 auta}{\fs20\lang1033 
- "to invent" may perhaps have the simplest past tense: }{\b\fs20\lang1033 autan\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033 .
\par }{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 POSSESSIVE PRONOMINAL ENDINGS
\par }{\lang3081 So far, we have discussed five pronominal endings that may be suffixed to verbs to function as their subject: -}{\b\lang3081 ny\'eb}{\lang3081  (often shortened to -}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 ) "I", -}{\b\lang3081 ly\'eb}{\lang3081  "you", -}{
\b\lang3081 lm\'eb}{\lang3081  and -}{\b\lang3081 mm\'eb}{\lang3081  "we" (inclusive and exclusive), plus -}{\b\lang3081 nt\'eb}{\lang3081  "they". We have also pointed out that Quenya pronouns usually appear as 
endings, not so often as separate words as in English.
\par \tab Pronouns may also describe possession or belonging. Among the English }{\i\lang3081 possessive pronouns}{\lang3081  we have "my" (and "mine"), "your(s)", "our(s)", "their(s)".  Quenya has endings for these pronouns as well, th
ough these endings are logically added to }{\i\lang3081 nouns}{\lang3081 , not to verbs. For instance, the ending for "my" is -}{\b\lang3081 nya}{\lang3081 . Thus, "my house" is }{\b\lang3081 coanya}{\lang3081 , while "my land" would be }{\b\lang3081 n
\'f3renya}{\lang3081 . The accent now falls on the syllable before the pronominal ending: }{\i\lang3081 co}{\lang3081 -}{\b\i\ul\lang3081 A}{\lang3081 -}{\i\lang3081 nya}{\lang3081 , }{\i\lang3081 n\'f3-}{\b\i\ul\lang3081 RE}{\i\lang3081 -nya}{\lang3081 
. All the pronominal endings begin in a consonant cluster, and in accordance with the normal rules, the stress falls on the second-to-last syllable when its vowel is followed by a group of consonants.
\par \tab Notice that the subject endings that we have already introduced, all end in the vowel -}{\b\lang3081 \'eb}{\lang3081 : -}{\b\lang3081 ny\'eb}{\lang3081  "I", -}{\b\lang3081 ly\'eb}{\lang3081 
 "you" etc. The corresponding possessive pronominal endings can be derived }{\i\lang3081 simply by changing the final vowel to -}{\b\i\lang3081 a}{\lang3081 . Here are the attested correspondences: 
\par 
\par \tab -}{\b\lang3081 ny\'eb}{\lang3081  "I" / -}{\b\lang3081 nya}{\lang3081  "my"
\par \tab -}{\b\lang3081 ly\'eb}{\lang3081  "you" / -}{\b\lang3081 lya}{\lang3081  "your"
\par \tab -}{\b\lang3081 lm\'eb}{\lang3081  "we" (incl.) / -}{\b\lang3081 lma}{\lang3081  "our" (incl.)
\par \tab -}{\b\lang3081 mm\'eb}{\lang3081  "we" (excl.) / -}{\b\lang3081 mma}{\lang3081  "our" (excl.)
\par 
\par So besides }{\b\lang3081 coanya}{\lang3081  "my house" we can have }{\b\lang3081 coalya}{\lang3081  "your house", whereas }{\b\lang3081 coalma}{\lang3081  and }{\b\lang3081 coamma}{\lang3081  would both translate as "our house" in English.
\par }{\fs20\cf1\lang3081 NOTE: As for the distinction between inclusive and exclusive "our", it would closely correspond to the distinction between inclusive and exclusive "we", explained in the previous lesson. Hence "our house" is expressed as }{
\b\fs20\cf1\lang3081 coalma}{\fs20\cf1\lang3081  if the one(s) you are addressing is (are) also among the owners of the house and thus }{\i\fs20\cf1\lang3081 included}{\fs20\cf1\lang3081  in the word "our". Conversely, }{\b\fs20\cf1\lang3081 coamma}{
\fs20\cf1\lang3081  is the word to use for "our house" if you are talking to a party that is }{\i\fs20\cf1\lang3081 not}{\fs20\cf1\lang3081  among the owners of the house and hence is }{\i\fs20\cf1\lang3081 not}{\fs20\cf1\lang3081 
 included in the word "our".
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 It seems very reasonable to assume that the ending -}{\b\lang3081 nt\'eb}{\lang3081  "they" has a counterpart -}{\b\lang3081 nta}{\lang3081 
 "their", though the latter suffix is not attested in published material. One problem may seem to be that it would clash with the dual allative ending, but in context it would hardly be very difficult to tell whether (say) }{\b\lang3081 ciryanta}{
\lang3081  is to be interpreted "to a couple of ships" or "their ship". Presumably the endings could even be combined: }{\b\lang3081 ciryantanta}{\lang3081 , "to their couple of ships"! I won't construct any exercises involving the unattested ending -}{
\b\lang3081 nta}{\lang3081  "their", but I think it is safe enough to be recommended to writers.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 Combining pronominal possessive endings with endings for case and number:}{\lang3081 
 Combining these two kinds of endings is what truly makes the total number of forms that a Quenya noun can assume explode. We are left with hundreds of possible combinations, but since they are just that \endash  combinations \endash 
 the endings involved are not nearly as numerous, and the load on the student's memory is not so great after all.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 Here follows }{\b\lang3081 sambelya}{\lang3081  "your room" (}{\b\lang3081 samb\'eb}{\lang3081  "room, chamber" + -}{\b\lang3081 lya}{\lang3081  "your") inflected for the all the
 numbers and cases so far discussed in this course. If this list appears somewhat complicated and daunting at first glance, the student will be relieved to discover that it is actually }{\i\lang3081 perfectly regular}{\lang3081 
 and in a way contains no new information at all: Just start from }{\b\lang3081 sambelya}{\lang3081  "your room" and treat it as you would any other noun in -}{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081 
, adding the normal endings for number and case. One consequence of this is that the word now has a plural in -}{\b\lang3081 r}{\lang3081  (}{\b\lang3081 sambelyar}{\lang3081  "your rooms"), though }{\b\lang3081 samb\'eb}{\lang3081 
 "room" occurring by itself would be an }{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 -plural (}{\b\lang3081 sambi}{\lang3081  "rooms").
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \'a4 }{\lang3081 NOMINATIVE/ACCUSATIVE: singular }{\b\cf2\lang3081 sambe}{\b\cf6\lang3081 lya}{\lang3081  "}{\b\cf6\lang3081 your}{\lang3081  }{\cf2\lang3081 room}{\lang3081 ", dual }{
\b\cf2\lang3081 sambe}{\b\cf6\lang3081 lya}{\b\lang3081 t}{\lang3081  "}{\b\cf6\lang3081 your}{\lang3081  couple of }{\cf2\lang3081 room}{\lang3081 s", plural }{\b\cf2\lang3081 sambe}{\b\cf6\lang3081 lya}{\b\lang3081 r}{\lang3081  "}{\b\cf6\lang3081 your}
{\lang3081  }{\cf2\lang3081 room}{\lang3081 s". }{\fs20\lang3081 (In the archaic form of Quenya that had a distinct accusative, we would presumably see the acc. sing. }{\b\fs20\cf2\lang3081 sambe}{\b\fs20\cf6\lang3081 ly\'e1}{\fs20\lang3081 
 and the acc. pl. }{\b\fs20\cf2\lang3081 sambe}{\b\fs20\cf6\lang3081 lya}{\b\fs20\lang3081 i}{\fs20\lang3081 , but in this course, we don't use distinct accusative forms.)
\par }{\lang1033 \'a4 }{\lang3081 GENITIVE: singular }{\b\cf2\lang3081 sambe}{\b\cf6\lang3081 ly}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  "of }{\b\cf6\lang3081 your}{\cf6\lang3081  }{\cf2\lang3081 room}{\lang3081 " }{\i\lang3081 (the genitive ending -}{\b\i\lang3081 o}{
\i\lang3081  regularly displacing the final -}{\b\i\lang3081 a}{\i\lang3081  of }{\b\i\lang3081 sambelya}{\i\lang3081  even though the -}{\b\i\lang3081 a}{\i\lang3081  is here part of another ending)}{\lang3081 , dual }{\b\cf2\lang3081 sambe}{
\b\cf6\lang3081 lya}{\b\lang3081 to}{\lang3081  "of }{\b\cf6\lang3081 your}{\lang3081  couple of }{\cf2\lang3081 room}{\lang3081 s", plural }{\b\cf2\lang3081 sambe}{\b\cf6\lang3081 lya}{\b\lang3081 ron}{\lang3081  "of }{\b\cf6\lang3081 your}{\lang3081  }{
\cf2\lang3081 room}{\lang3081 s".
\par }{\lang1033 \'a4 }{\lang3081 POSSESSIVE: singular }{\b\cf2\lang3081 sambe}{\b\cf6\lang3081 lya}{\b\lang3081 va}{\lang3081  "of }{\b\cf6\lang3081 your}{\cf6\lang3081  }{\cf2\lang3081 room}{\lang3081 ", dual ?}{\b\cf2\lang3081 sambe}{\b\cf6\lang3081 lya}{
\b\lang3081 twa}{\lang3081  "of }{\b\cf6\lang3081 your}{\lang3081  couple of }{\cf2\lang3081 room}{\lang3081 s", plural }{\b\cf2\lang3081 sambe}{\b\cf6\lang3081 lya}{\b\lang3081 iva}{\lang3081  "of }{\b\cf6\lang3081 your}{\lang3081  }{\cf2\lang3081 room}{
\lang3081 s". }{\i\lang3081 (While we here provide the same translations for the genitive and possessive cases, there are of course certain subtle shades of meaning that distinguish them.)}{\b\lang3081 
\par }{\lang1033 \'a4 }{\lang3081 DATIVE: }{\b\cf2\lang3081 sambe}{\b\cf6\lang3081 lya}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081  "for }{\b\cf6\lang3081 your}{\lang3081  room", dual }{\b\cf2\lang3081 sambe}{\b\cf6\lang3081 lya}{\b\lang3081 nt}{\lang3081  "for }{
\b\cf6\lang3081 your}{\lang3081  couple of }{\cf2\lang3081 room}{\lang3081 s", plural }{\b\cf2\lang3081 sambe}{\b\cf6\lang3081 lya}{\b\lang3081 in}{\lang3081  "for }{\b\cf6\lang3081 your}{\lang3081  }{\cf2\lang3081 room}{\lang3081 s".
\par }{\lang1033 \'a4 }{\lang3081 ALLATIVE: }{\b\cf2\lang3081 sambe}{\b\cf6\lang3081 lya}{\b\lang3081 nna}{\lang3081  "to }{\b\cf6\lang3081 your}{\lang3081  room", dual }{\b\cf2\lang3081 sambe}{\b\cf6\lang3081 lya}{\b\lang3081 nta}{\lang3081  "to }{
\b\cf6\lang3081 your}{\lang3081  couple of }{\cf2\lang3081 room}{\lang3081 s", plural }{\b\cf2\lang3081 sambe}{\b\cf6\lang3081 lya}{\b\lang3081 nnar}{\lang3081  "to }{\b\cf6\lang3081 your}{\lang3081  }{\cf2\lang3081 room}{\lang3081 s".
\par }{\lang1033 \'a4 }{\lang3081 ABLATIVE: }{\b\cf2\lang3081 sambe}{\b\cf6\lang3081 lya}{\b\lang3081 llo}{\lang3081  "from }{\b\cf6\lang3081 your}{\lang3081  }{\cf2\lang3081 room}{\lang3081 ", dual }{\b\cf2\lang3081 sambe}{\b\cf6\lang3081 lya}{\b\lang3081 lto
}{\lang3081  "from }{\b\cf6\lang3081 your}{\lang3081  couple of }{\cf2\lang3081 room}{\lang3081 s", plural }{\b\cf2\lang3081 sambe}{\b\cf6\lang3081 lya}{\b\lang3081 llon}{\lang3081  (or, -}{\b\lang3081 llor}{\lang3081 ) "from }{\b\cf6\lang3081 your}{
\lang3081  }{\cf2\lang3081 room}{\lang3081 s". }{\i\lang3081 (In the case of the allative and the ablative, the accent falls on the vowel in front of the case ending [e.g. sambely}{\b\i\ul\lang3081 A}{\i\lang3081 
llo], in accordance with the normal stress rules \endash  which apply for all the forms here listed.)}{\lang3081 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
\par }{\fs20\lang3081 NOTE: Elendil's Declaration includes the words }{\b\fs20\lang3081 sinom\'eb maruvan, ar hildinyar}{\fs20\lang3081  "in this place will I abide, and my heirs". From the example }{\b\fs20\cf2\lang3081 hildi}{\b\fs20\cf6\lang3081 nya}{
\b\fs20\lang3081 r}{\fs20\lang3081  "}{\fs20\cf6\lang3081 my}{\fs20\lang3081  }{\fs20\cf2\lang3081 heirs}{\fs20\lang3081 ", one might argue that plural nouns with plural forms in -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 i}{\fs20\lang3081  (like }{\b\fs20\lang3081 hildi}{
\fs20\lang3081  "heirs") should assume this ending before pronominal endings and secondary plural markers (like the -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 nya}{\fs20\lang3081 - and -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 r}{\fs20\lang3081  of }{\b\fs20\lang3081 hildinyar}{\fs20\lang3081 
) are added. If so, "your rooms" should actually be }{\b\fs20\lang3081 samb}{\b\fs20\ul\lang3081 i}{\b\fs20\lang3081 lyar}{\fs20\lang3081  rather than }{\b\fs20\lang3081 samb}{\b\fs20\ul\lang3081 e}{\b\fs20\lang3081 lyar}{\fs20\lang3081 
 as we suggested above. This is possible, but the example }{\b\fs20\lang3081 hildinyar}{\fs20\lang3081  may have its own peculiarities; see below. 
\par }{\lang3081 
\par Notice that the possessive pronominal ending is added }{\i\lang3081 first}{\lang3081 , and endings for number and case are added }{\i\lang3081 after}{\lang3081  it: "From your room" is therefore }{\b\lang3081 sambelyallo}{\lang3081 , }{\i\lang3081 not}{
\lang3081  **}{\b\lang3081 sambellolya}{\lang3081 . For a Tolkien-made example, cf. the greeting }{\b\lang3081 Anar caluva tie}{\b\cf6\lang3081 lya}{\b\cf2\lang3081 nna}{\lang3081  "the Sun shall shine }{\cf2\lang3081 upon}{\lang3081  }{\cf6\lang3081 your
}{\lang3081  path" (UT:22, 51): The noun }{\b\lang3081 ti\'eb}{\lang3081  "path" here appears combined with the pronominal ending -}{\b\lang3081 lya}{\lang3081  "your", and }{\b\lang3081 tielya}{\lang3081 
 "your path" is further expanded with the allative ending -}{\b\lang3081 nna}{\lang3081  "upon" to express "upon your path".
\par \tab Another example of a noun equipped with both a pronominal ending and a case ending occurs in the most famous Elvish greeting of all, "a star shines on the hour of our meeting": }{\b\lang3081 Elen s\'edla l\'famenn' omentielmo}{\lang3081 , as the vers
ion printed in the first edition of LotR went. With this lesson we have finally presented all the grammar one needs to fully understand this sentence: }{\b\lang3081 Elen}{\lang3081  "a star", }{\b\lang3081 s\'edla}{\lang3081 
 "shines" or rather "is shining" (the present/continuative tense of the verb }{\b\lang3081 sil}{\lang3081 -), }{\b\lang3081 l\'famenn'}{\lang3081  or in full }{\b\lang3081 l\'famenna}{\lang3081  "on (the) hour" (the noun }{\b\lang3081 l\'fam\'eb}{
\lang3081  "hour" + the allative ending -}{\b\lang3081 nna}{\lang3081  "on"), and finally the word that is relevant for our present discussion: }{\b\lang3081 omentielmo}{\lang3081 . This must be analyzed as an abstract noun (or gerund?) }{\b\lang3081 
omenti\'eb}{\lang3081  "meeting" + the ending -}{\b\lang3081 lma}{\lang3081  for inclusive "our" (WJ:367), and }{\b\lang3081 omentielma}{\lang3081  "our meeting" is then equipped with the genitive ending -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  to express "}{
\i\lang3081 of}{\lang3081  our meeting": Hence }{\b\lang3081 omentielmo}{\lang3081 , since the ending -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  displaces a final -}{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081 .
\par \tab }{\i\lang3081 Dual inclusive "our":}{\lang3081  In the revised edition of LotR (1966), Tolkien altered the word }{\b\lang3081 omentielmo}{\lang3081  to }{\b\lang3081 omentielvo}{\lang3081 
, though the translation remained the same: "of our meeting". Tolkien made up an "internal" explanation for this change, briefly referred to in one of Humphrey Carpenter's notes o
n the collection of Tolkien's letters that he edited (Letters:447, notes on letter #205):
\par 
\par }\pard \li705\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 The Elvish language Quenya makes a distinction in its dual inflexion, which turns on the number of persons involved; failure to understand this was, Tolkien remarked
, 'a mistake generally made by mortals'. So in this case, Tolkien made a note that the 'Thain's Book of Minas Tirith', one of the supposed sources of }{\i\lang3081 The Lord of the Rings}{\lang3081 , had the reading }{\i\lang3081 omentielvo}{\lang3081 
, but that Frodo's original (lost) manuscript probably had }{\i\lang3081 omentielmo}{\lang3081 ; and that }{\i\lang3081 omentielvo}{\lang3081  is the correct form in the context.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
\par The point seems to be this: In the greeting "a star shines on the hour of our meeting", the word "our" refers to a meeting of }{\i\lang3081 two}{\lang3081  people (Frodo and Gildor, the former speaking to the latter). Therefore, a }{\i\lang3081 dual}{
\lang3081  "our" is appropriate here \endash  "our" meaning "of you (sg.) and me". Frodo's "lost" original manuscript instead had a }{\i\lang3081 plural}{\lang3081  "our" (ending -}{\b\lang3081 lma}{\lang3081 , or with the genitive ending -}{\b\lang3081 
lmo}{\lang3081 ), but this is the kind of "our" that is used to refer to 
something belonging to three or more people. It was inappropriate when only 2 persons, Frodo and Gildor, were involved in "our meeting". Frodo's little grammatical error was mercifully corrected in the "Thain's Book of Minas Tirith", one of the copies of 
his original manuscript.
\par \tab This "internal" explanation is of course mere rationalizing on Tolkien's part. From an "external" point of view, it is obvious what is going on: After publishing LotR, the Professor couldn't resist the temptation to continue tinker
ing with the Quenya pronoun table (a process that had already been going on for decades). Tolkien apparently decided to introduce special }{\i\lang3081 dual}{\lang3081  forms of (inclusive) "we" and "our", used when only }{\i\lang3081 two}{\lang3081 
 persons are involved: the speaker and the one who is addressed. Unfortunately, this revision conflicted with a piece of already-published Quenya, but even so, the Professor changed }{\b\lang3081 omentielmo}{\lang3081  to }{\b\lang3081 omentielvo}{
\lang3081  and made up a little story that would explain the discrepancy from an "internal" point of view: Frodo just 
couldn't get his grammar right! Gildor's remark to the other Elves, "here is a scholar in the Ancient Tongue", suddenly ring rather ironic! Perhaps we are to imagine mocking smiles twitching in their lips \endash  "ah, after all these centuries, mortals }
{\i\lang3081 still}{\lang3081  can't get their dual pronouns right..."
\par \tab So let us poor mortals try to figure it out: What, really, is the ending for dual (inclusive) "our" \endash  and the corresponding ending for dual inclusive "we"? The most straightforward extrapolation would go like this: Rem
oving the genitive ending -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  from }{\b\lang3081 omentielvo}{\lang3081  gives us }{\b\lang3081 omentielva}{\lang3081 , for surely this pronominal possessive suffix ends in -}{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081 
 just like all the other attested endings of this kind. We proceed to isolate -}{\b\lang3081 lva}{\lang3081  as the ending for dual inclusive "our", e.g. }{\b\lang3081 coa}{\b\cf6\lang3081 lva}{\lang3081  "}{\cf6\lang3081 our}{\lang3081 
 house" of a house owned by two persons, one of them speaking to the other. According to the pattern observed in such pairs as -}{\b\lang3081 lya}{\lang3081  "your" vs. -}{\b\lang3081 ly\'eb}{\lang3081 
 "you", we may further assume that our reconstructed ending -}{\b\lang3081 lva}{\lang3081  "our" corresponds to an ending -}{\b\lang3081 lv\'eb}{\lang3081  "we" \endash  a }{\i\lang3081 dual inclusive}{\lang3081  "we" meaning "you (thou) and I": }{
\b\lang3081 Lelyuva}{\b\cf6\lang3081 lv\'eb}{\b\lang3081  i ostonna}{\lang3081  "}{\cf6\lang3081 we}{\lang3081  will go to the city [, you and I]". Notice that the ending for inclusive "we" introduced in the previous lesson, namely -}{\b\lang3081 lm\'eb}{
\lang3081 , would refer to a group of at least three people. 
\par }{\fs20\lang3081 NOTE: As far as is known, Quenya has no specific ending for dual }{\i\fs20\lang3081 exclusive}{\fs20\lang3081  "we" \endash  sc. an ending meaning "I and exactly one other person"! It is assumed that -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 mm\'eb}{
\fs20\lang3081  is used for exclusive "we", and -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 mma}{\fs20\lang3081  for exclusive "our", no matter whether two or more people are involved. Cf. one of our home-made examples above; we put the words }{\b\fs20\lang3081 ut\'falie}{
\b\fs20\ul\lang3081 mm\'eb}{\b\fs20\lang3081  Valinorello}{\fs20\lang3081  into the mouths of Galadriel and Celeborn. On the other hand, let none be surprised if it turns out tha
t Tolkien actually did invent specific endings for dual exclusive "we" and "our", to make the pronoun table wholly symmetric.
\par }{\lang3081 \tab As I said, the most }{\i\lang3081 straightforward}{\lang3081  reconstruction based on the form }{\b\lang3081 omentielvo}{\lang3081  "of our meeting" would lead us to extrapolate the inclusive dual endings -}{\b\lang3081 lva}{\lang3081 
 "our" and -}{\b\lang3081 lv\'eb}{\lang3081  "we". This reconstruction may well be correct, and the student should notice these forms, for many writers have used them. Yet there are other possibilities as well. If we are to isolate the specifically }{
\i\lang3081 dual}{\lang3081  element of the word }{\b\lang3081 omentielvo}{\lang3081 , it has to be the }{\b\lang3081 v}{\lang3081 , that must somehow be related to the dual ending -}{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081  (as in }{\b\lang3081 Aldu}{\lang3081 
 "Two Trees"). But if }{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081  were to be transmuted into a consonant, we would rather expect it to become }{\b\lang3081 w}{\lang3081 , which is the corresponding "semi-vowel" \endash  the vowel }{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081  used as a }{
\i\lang3081 de facto}{\lang3081  consonant. Therefore it has been suggested that the ending for dual inclusive "our" may not be -}{\b\lang3081 lva}{\lang3081  after all, but perhaps rather -}{\b\lang3081 lwa}{\lang3081 
. According to this theory, adding the genitive ending -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  produces -}{\b\lang3081 lvo}{\lang3081  instead of **-}{\b\lang3081 lwo}{\lang3081  for the simple reason that }{\b\lang3081 wo}{\lang3081  (unlike }{\b\lang3081 wa}{
\lang3081 ) is not a possible Quenya combination. Therefore, }{\b\lang3081 w}{\lang3081  (the consonant corresponding to }{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081 ) here becomes }{\b\lang3081 v}{\lang3081  before -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081 
. A possible phonological parallel is provided by some of the names quoted in PM:352-353. One example is }{\b\lang3081 Telufinw\'eb}{\lang3081  "Last Finw\'eb", which is said to have a shorter form }{\b\lang3081 Telvo}{\lang3081 
. This is apparently the initial element of the full name, }{\b\lang3081 telu}{\lang3081 -, + the suffix -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  (here functioning as a masculine ending). Notice how the -}{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081  of }{\b\lang3081 telu}{\lang3081 
- has become a }{\b\lang3081 v}{\lang3081  in the name }{\b\lang3081 Telvo}{\lang3081 , evidently because of the following -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081 
. Perhaps we are to imagine a development whereby a form "Teluo" is reduced to two syllables by pronouncing it "Telwo", and this form in turn has to be altered to }{\b\lang3081 Telvo}{\lang3081  to get rid of the unwanted combination }{\b\lang3081 wo}{
\lang3081 . Similarly, "omentielwo" could plausibly transmute into the attested form }{\b\lang3081 omentielvo}{\lang3081 .
\par \tab If the ending for dual inclusive "our" is actually -}{\b\lang3081 lwa}{\lang3081  rather than -}{\b\lang3081 lva}{\lang3081 , we may also assume that the ending for dual inclusive "we" is -}{\b\lang3081 lw\'eb}{\lang3081  rather -}{\b\lang3081 lv\'eb
}{\lang3081 . But extrapolating from a form that is itself reconstructed is of course a risky business. 
\par 
\par }{\i\lang3081 Adding pronominal endings to nouns ending in a consonant:}{\lang3081  To avoid impossible consonant clusters, an extra vowel -}{\b\lang3081 e}{\lang3081 - may be 
inserted before the pronominal ending where necessary. As we remember, this extra vowel may also turn up before case endings. Combining }{\b\lang3081 atar}{\lang3081  "father" with -}{\b\lang3081 lya}{\lang3081 
 "your" to express "your father" would probably produce }{\b\lang3081 atarelya}{\lang3081  (since **}{\b\lang3081 atarlya}{\lang3081  is not a possible Quenya word). "Our father" would be }{\b\lang3081 ataremma}{\lang3081  (exclusive "our") or }{
\b\lang3081 atarelma}{\lang3081  (inclusive "our") \endash  and either }{\b\lang3081 atarelva}{\lang3081  or }{\b\lang3081 atarelwa}{\lang3081  if "our" is a dual inclusive pronoun ("the father of the two of us"). It may be that if the noun is }{
\i\lang3081 plural}{\lang3081 , one would use }{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081  as the connecting vowel, if pronominal endings and case endings behave in the same way. Cf. Tolkien's }{\b\lang3081 elen}{\b\ul\lang3081 i}{\b\lang3081 llor}{\lang3081 
 for "from stars". Thus, "your stars" might similarly be }{\b\lang3081 elen}{\b\ul\lang3081 i}{\b\lang3081 lyar}{\lang3081 , and "our (excl.) fathers" should evidently be }{\b\lang3081 atar}{\b\ul\lang3081 i}{\b\lang3081 mmar}{\lang3081  rather than }{
\b\lang3081 atar}{\b\ul\lang3081 e}{\b\lang3081 mmar}{\lang3081 . (Of course, it is primarily the final -}{\b\lang3081 r}{\lang3081  which functions as a plural marker here, so there can be no misunderstanding regarding the number anyway.) It may be that 
}{\b\lang3081 hildinyar}{\lang3081  "my heirs" from Elendil's Declaration is an example of this, if the noun "heir" is ?}{\b\lang3081 hil}{\lang3081  with a stem }{\b\lang3081 hild}{\lang3081 -, hence pl. }{\b\lang3081 hildi}{\lang3081 .}{\i\lang3081 

\par }{\lang3081 \tab However, the ending -}{\b\lang3081 nya}{\lang3081  "my" seems to be somewhat special. Where a connecting vowel is required, it apparently }{\i\lang3081 always}{\lang3081  prefers -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 
-, whether the noun it is added to is singular or plural. It seems that this connecting vowel reflects the vowel of the primitive root producing the Eldarin 1st person pronouns, namely }{\i\lang3081 NI}{\i\lang3081\super 2}{\lang3081  (listed in the }{
\i\lang3081 Etymologies}{\lang3081  and simply defined "I"). F\'edriel's Song has }{\b\lang3081 Anarinya}{\lang3081 , not **}{\b\lang3081 Anarenya}{\lang3081 , for "my Sun". Similarly, "my father" is }{\b\lang3081 atarinya}{\lang3081 
 (LR:61) rather than ?}{\b\lang3081 atarenya}{\lang3081 ; we cannot know whether the latter form is valid at all. The (nominative) plural "my fathers" would of course be }{\b\lang3081 atarinyar}{\lang3081 , so the singular and plur
al remain distinct. In the same fashion, the singular form of }{\b\lang3081 hildinyar}{\lang3081  "my heirs" would perhaps be }{\b\lang3081 hild}{\b\ul\lang3081 i}{\b\lang3081 nya}{\lang3081  "my heir" with the same connecting vowel }{\b\lang3081 i}{
\lang3081 , since it is always preferred by the ending -}{\b\lang3081 nya}{\lang3081 . In the case of another ending, like -}{\b\lang3081 mma}{\lang3081  "our", we might conceivably see a variation between }{\b\lang3081 hild}{\b\ul\lang3081 e}{
\b\lang3081 mma}{\lang3081  (?) "our heir" and }{\b\lang3081 hild}{\b\ul\lang3081 i}{\b\lang3081 mmar}{\lang3081  "our heirs"; in the latter case, the -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081  is the normal nominative plural ending used as a connecting vowel. (The }{
\i\lang3081 Etymologies}{\lang3081 , entry }{\i\lang3081 KHIL}{\lang3081 , lists precisely such a plural form }{\b\lang3081 hildi}{\lang3081  \endash  there glossed "followers", close enough to "heirs" in meaning.)
\par \tab It has been suggested that the ending -}{\b\lang3081 nya}{\lang3081 , added to a noun in -}{\b\lang3081 \'eb}{\lang3081 , would also displace this -}{\b\lang3081 \'eb}{\lang3081  with -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 - (much like the plural ending -}{
\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081  displaces a final -}{\b\lang3081 \'eb}{\lang3081  when added to a noun). However, one Tolkien example that was published in the summer of 2000 demonstrates that this is not so: VT41:11 has }{\b\lang3081 \'f3renya}{\lang3081 
, not **}{\b\lang3081 \'f3rinya}{\lang3081 , for "my heart" (}{\b\lang3081 \'f3r\'eb}{\lang3081 : "heart" in the sense of "inner mind"). According to the system we are trying to sketch, even the plural "my hearts" would be }{\b\lang3081 \'f3renyar}{
\lang3081  rather than ?}{\b\lang3081 \'f3rinyar}{\lang3081 , since }{\b\lang3081 \'f3r\'eb}{\lang3081  ends in -}{\b\lang3081 \'eb}{\lang3081  and thus requires no connecting vowel before suffixes anyway. Cf. the Plotz Letter: }{\b\lang3081 lassennar}{
\lang3081 , not **}{\b\lang3081 lassinnar}{\lang3081 , as the plural allative of }{\b\lang3081 lass\'eb}{\lang3081  "leaf" \endash  though the nominative pl. is }{\b\lang3081 lassi}{\lang3081 . In a similar fashion, we would probably see }{\b\lang3081 
lassenya}{\lang3081  "my leaf" vs. }{\b\lang3081 lassenyar}{\lang3081  "my leaves" (hardly **}{\b\lang3081 lassinyar}{\lang3081 ). The connecting vowel -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 - only turns up where plural nouns ending in a }{\i\lang3081 consonant}{
\lang3081  are to receive endings; singular nouns have -}{\b\lang3081 e}{\lang3081 - instead, except in the case of the ending -}{\b\lang3081 nya}{\lang3081  "my" which prefers -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 
- whether the noun it is added to is singular or plural. (If it is plural, this will be sufficiently indicated by the secondary endings for number and/or case that are added }{\i\lang3081 after}{\lang3081  the ending -}{\b\lang3081 nya}{\lang3081 .)

\par }{\fs20\lang3081 NOTE: Of course, we must assume that nouns in -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 \'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  that have }{\i\fs20\lang3081 stem-forms}{\fs20\lang3081  in -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 i}{\fs20\lang3081 
- would appear in the latter form when endings are to be added. So if }{\b\fs20\lang3081 l\'edr\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  (}{\b\fs20\lang3081 l\'edri}{\fs20\lang3081 -) means "song", "my song" would evidently be }{\b\fs20\lang3081 l\'edrinya}{\fs20\lang3081 
 (plural }{\b\fs20\lang3081 l\'edrinyar}{\fs20\lang3081  "my songs"). But this is actually a quite different matter, for here we would evidently see }{\b\fs20\lang3081 l\'edri}{\fs20\lang3081 - before }{\i\fs20\lang3081 any}{\fs20\lang3081 
 suffix, for pronoun or case (}{\b\fs20\lang3081 l\'edrilya}{\fs20\lang3081  "your song", ablative }{\b\fs20\lang3081 l\'edrillo}{\fs20\lang3081  "from a song", etc.)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 In some instances, }{\i\lang3081 contracted}{\lang3081  forms are used instead of inserting any connecting vowel. UT:193 provides the form }{\b\lang3081 aranya}{\lang3081 
, untranslated but apparently meaning "my king" (Erendis uses this word when addressing the King of N\'famenor). This is apparently }{\b\lang3081 aran}{\lang3081  "king" + -}{\b\lang3081 nya}{\lang3081  "my", the impossible form **}{\b\lang3081 arannya}{
\lang3081  being simplified to }{\b\lang3081 aranya}{\lang3081 . Possibly ?}{\b\lang3081 araninya}{\lang3081 
 would also be acceptable Quenya, but when the noun ends in the same consonant as the pronominal ending begins in, it may be permissible to let the last consonant of the noun and the first consonant of the ending merge \endash 
 a phenomenon also observed where case endings are involved. (Cf. }{\b\lang3081 mindonnar}{\lang3081  rather than }{\b\lang3081 mindoninnar}{\lang3081  as the pl. allative of }{\b\lang3081 mindon}{\lang3081  "tower"; perhaps "my towers" would be }{
\b\lang3081 mindonyar}{\lang3081  rather than }{\b\lang3081 mindoninyar}{\lang3081 .)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
\par Especially where the ending -}{\b\lang3081 nya}{\lang3081  "my" is concerned, contracted forms may turn up even where no contraction would be "necessary" to achieve a permissible Quenya word. The High-elven word for "son" is }{\b\lang3081 yondo}{
\lang3081 , so "my son" might simply be }{\b\lang3081 yondonya}{\lang3081 , and there is little reason to doubt that this is a valid form. Yet in LR:61 Elendil addresses his son as }{\b\lang3081 yonya}{\lang3081 , apparently a contracted variant of }{
\b\lang3081 yondonya}{\lang3081 . Perhaps }{\b\lang3081 yonya}{\lang3081  would be used for "my son" primarily when }{\i\lang3081 addressing}{\lang3081  the son concerned. If so, it would parallel another example: One Quenya word for "child" is }{
\b\lang3081 h\'edna}{\lang3081 , or }{\b\lang3081 hina}{\lang3081  with a short vowel \endash  the latter only being used when "addressing a (young) child" (WJ:403). Tolkien went on to note that this }{\b\lang3081 hina}{\lang3081 
, used as a form of address, often appeared in the form }{\b\lang3081 hinya}{\lang3081  "my child" \endash  the latter being contracted from }{\b\lang3081 hinanya}{\lang3081  (still WJ:403).
\par 
\par }{\i\cf2\lang3081 Summary of Lesson Fourteen:}{\lang3081  The Quenya }{\i\lang3081 allative}{\lang3081  case has the ending -}{\b\lang3081 nna}{\lang3081  (plural -}{\b\lang3081 nnar}{\lang3081 ) and expresses the basic idea of "to, toward", e.g. }{
\b\lang3081 ciryanna}{\lang3081  "to a ship". In certain contexts, this case may also express "on, upon" or "into". The }{\i\lang3081 ablative}{\lang3081  case has the ending -}{\b\lang3081 llo}{\lang3081  (plural -}{\b\lang3081 llon}{\lang3081 
, alternatively -}{\b\lang3081 llor}{\lang3081 ) and signifies "from", e.g. }{\b\lang3081 ciryallo}{\lang3081  "from a ship"; sometimes the ablative may also imply "out of". The }{\i\lang3081 dual}{\lang3081 
 forms of the allative and ablative endings are -}{\b\lang3081 nta}{\lang3081  and -}{\b\lang3081 lto}{\lang3081 , respectively (at least in the case of nouns with nominative dual forms in -}{\b\lang3081 t}{\lang3081 
; it may be that nouns with nominative dual forms in -}{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081  would rather have the basic endings -}{\b\lang3081 nna}{\lang3081  or -}{\b\lang3081 llo}{\lang3081 
 following this vowel). If a noun ending in a consonant is to receive the case ending for allative or ablative, a connecting vowel (in the singular -}{\b\lang3081 e}{\lang3081 -, in the plural -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 
-) may be inserted before the case ending to avoid an impossible consonant cluster; otherwise, a contracted form is used (e.g. }{\b\lang3081 R\'f3mello}{\lang3081  "from the East", for }{\i\lang3081 R\'f3men-llo}{\lang3081 ). \endash  The verb }{
\b\lang3081 equ\'eb}{\lang3081  is a peculiar form that is not inflected for tense and rarely receives endings of any kind; it means "said" or "says" and is used to introduce quotations where the subject (which follows the verb }{\b\lang3081 equ\'eb}{
\lang3081  and precedes the quotation) is a proper name or an independent pronoun. \endash  The verb }{\b\lang3081 auta}{\lang3081 - "pass, go away, leave" has rather surprising past and perfect forms: }{\b\lang3081 oant\'eb}{\lang3081  or }{\b\lang3081 
oanti\'eb}{\lang3081  if the verb refers to physically leaving one place (and going to another), but }{\b\lang3081 v\'e1n\'eb}{\lang3081  and }{\b\lang3081 av\'e1ni\'eb}{\lang3081  if the verb refers to disappearing, being lost, or dying off. \endash 
 Quenya }{\i\lang3081 possessive pronouns}{\lang3081  are normally expressed as endings added to the relevant noun (the thing that is owned). These suffixes include -}{\b\lang3081 nya}{\lang3081  "my", -}{\b\lang3081 lya}{\lang3081  "your", -}{
\b\lang3081 lma}{\lang3081  "our" (inclusive), and -}{\b\lang3081 mma}{\lang3081  "our" (exclusive). Notice that these possessive endings correspond to the subject pronominal endings suffixed to verbs, the former ending in -}{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081 
 whereas the latter end in -}{\b\lang3081 \'eb}{\lang3081  (therefore the unattested ending for "their" may well be -}{\b\lang3081 nta}{\lang3081 , corresponding to -}{\b\lang3081 nt\'eb}{\lang3081  "they"). There is also a specific ending for }{
\i\lang3081 dual inclusive}{\lang3081  "our", but its form cannot be confidently reconstructed (either -}{\b\lang3081 lva}{\lang3081  or -}{\b\lang3081 lwa}{\lang3081 ; only -}{\b\lang3081 lvo}{\lang3081 
 with the genitive ending added is attested). Where required, connecting vowels may be fitted in before the noun and the pronominal ending, probably by much the same rules that apply to the case endings -}{\b\lang3081 nna}{\lang3081  and -}{\b\lang3081 
llo}{\lang3081 , except that the ending -}{\b\lang3081 nya}{\lang3081  "my" seems to consistently prefer the connecting vowel -}{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 
-. Once a noun has received a possessive pronominal ending, this noun may be further inflected for number or case just like a regular noun in -}{\b\lang3081 a}{\lang3081  would be.
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 VOCABULARY}{\lang3081 
\par We have now exhausted the basic numbers 1-12 (including the extrapolated number }{\b\lang3081 rasta}{\lang3081 ). Higher numbers are unfortunately rather uncertain, though we have some clues. I may add some thoughts about this later, but in th
is and the next couple of lessons we will introduce the attested }{\i\lang3081 ordinal}{\lang3081  numbers \endash  showing order or position in a series, like English "first", "second", "third" etc. 
\par 
\par }{\b\lang3081 minya}{\lang3081  "first" }{\fs20\lang3081 (cf. the number }{\b\fs20\lang3081 min\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  "one" and the adjectival ending -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 ya}{\fs20\lang3081 . The original name of the First Clan of the Elves was }{
\b\fs20\lang3081 Minyar}{\fs20\lang3081 , literally "Firsts", though the Noldor later called them Vanyar or "Fair Ones" instead [WJ:380, 382-383].)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 equ\'eb}{\lang3081  "say(s), said" }{\fs20\lang3081 (tense-less verb introducing quotations)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 auta}{\lang3081 - "to leave, to go/pass away" }{\fs20\lang3081 (past tense }{\b\fs20\lang3081 oant\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  and perfect }{\b\fs20\lang3081 oanti\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 , alternatively }{\b\fs20\lang3081 v\'e1n\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 
 and }{\b\fs20\lang3081 av\'e1ni\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 , the latter two forms referring to }{\i\fs20\lang3081 disappearing}{\fs20\lang3081  or }{\i\fs20\lang3081 dying off}{\fs20\lang3081  as explained above).  The "past participle" of }{\b\fs20\lang3081 
auta}{\fs20\lang3081 - is said to be }{\b\fs20\lang3081 vanwa}{\fs20\lang3081  "lost, gone, passed, vanished" \endash  but this word may be treated almost as an independent adjective.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 menta}{\lang3081 - "to send"
\par }{\b\lang3081 ruc}{\lang3081 - "to feel fear or horror"; "to fear" }{\fs20\lang3081 (said to be constructed with "from" of the object feared, presumably meaning that what would be the direct object in English appears in the ablative case in Quenya)}{
\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 ambo}{\lang3081  "hill"
\par }{\b\lang3081 mindon}{\lang3081  "(great) tower" }{\fs20\lang3081 (cf. the }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Mindon Eldali\'e9va}{\fs20\lang3081  or "Great Tower of the Eldali\'eb" mentioned in the }{\i\fs20\lang3081 Silmarillion}{\fs20\lang3081 . The first syllable of 
}{\b\fs20\lang3081 mindon}{\fs20\lang3081  is related to the number }{\b\fs20\lang3081 min\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  "one", since a }{\b\fs20\lang3081 mindon}{\fs20\lang3081  is an }{\i\fs20\lang3081 isolated}{\fs20\lang3081 
 tower, not part of a larger structure.)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 N\'famen}{\lang3081  "West" }{\fs20\lang3081 (cf. }{\b\fs20\lang3081 N\'famenor}{\fs20\lang3081 , }{\b\fs20\lang3081 N\'famen\'f3r\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  "Westernesse" or "West-land": }{\b\fs20\lang3081 n\'fame}{\fs20\lang3081 (}{
\b\fs20\lang3081 n}{\fs20\lang3081 )-}{\b\fs20\lang3081 n\'f3r\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 ). It seems that the names of the basic directions are treated as proper names, capitalized and not requiring the article; cf. }{\b\fs20\lang3081 R\'f3mello}{
\fs20\lang3081  in }{\i\fs20\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  (which Tolkien translated "from }{\fs20\ul\lang3081 the}{\fs20\lang3081  East" even though there is no }{\b\fs20\lang3081 i}{\fs20\lang3081  in the Quenya text).}{
\par }{\b\lang3081 samb\'eb}{\lang3081  "room, chamber" }{\fs20\lang3081 (Sindarin }{\i\fs20\lang3081 sam}{\fs20\lang3081 , }{\i\fs20\lang3081 samm}{\fs20\lang3081 -; cf. the }{\i\fs20\lang3081 Sammath Naur}{\fs20\lang3081 
 or "Chambers of Fire" inside Mount Doom)}{\b\lang3081 
\par yondo}{\lang3081  "son"
\par }{\b\lang3081 haira}{\lang3081  "far, remote"
\par }{\b\lang3081 et}{\lang3081  "out" }{\fs20\lang3081 (followed by ablative to express "out of")}{\lang3081 
\par 
\par }{\fs20\lang3081 In addition to our traditional list of twelve new glosses we will also introduce a couple of proper names, requ
ired in these exercises. In accordance with our established policy we will avoid explicit references to Tolkien's mythos in these exercises, so no proper names coined by him will appear here. Yet we can readily coin new names using his principles. The end
ing -(}{\b\fs20\lang3081 n}{\fs20\lang3081 )}{\b\fs20\lang3081 dil}{\fs20\lang3081  often occurs in masculine names and signifies "friend" or "lover", e.g. }{\b\fs20\lang3081 E\'e4rendil}{\fs20\lang3081  "Sea-friend" or }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Elendil}{
\fs20\lang3081  "Star-friend" (but also implying "Elf-friend" since the words }{\b\fs20\lang3081 elen}{\fs20\lang3081  and }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Elda}{\fs20\lang3081  are ultimately related and were even confused by the Edain: WJ:4
10). So we can venture, say, }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Calandil}{\fs20\lang3081  "Friend of Light". As for feminine names, one observed pattern is that an adjective in -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 a}{\fs20\lang3081 
 can be turned into a fem. name by changing the ending to -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 \'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  (not to be confused with the plural form of the adjective). For instance, one of the queens of N\'famenor was called }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Ancalim\'eb}{
\fs20\lang3081 , transparently formed from the superlative form }{\b\fs20\lang3081 ancalima}{\fs20\lang3081  "brightest, exceedingly bright". (Similarly, }{\i\fs20\lang3081 masculine}{\fs20\lang3081  names can be made by changing the ending -}{
\b\fs20\lang3081 a}{\fs20\lang3081  to -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 o}{\fs20\lang3081  or -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 on}{\fs20\lang3081 , cf. }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Sauron}{\fs20\lang3081  vs. the adjective }{\b\fs20\lang3081 saura}{\fs20\lang3081  "foul, putrid" \endash 
 one suddenly understands why the Dark Lord didn't permit his servants to use the name the Elves had given him!) Starting from a suitable adjective like }{\b\fs20\lang3081 nessima}{\fs20\lang3081  "youthful", we can derive a plausible woman's name }{
\b\fs20\lang3081 Nessim\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  "Youthful One". However, the meaning of the names }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Calandil}{\fs20\lang3081  and }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Nessim\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  is of no importance for the exercises.
\par }{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 EXERCISES
\par }{\lang3081 
\par 1. Translate into English: 
\par 
\par }{\i\lang3081 A}{\lang3081 . }{\b\lang3081 Lelyuvalm\'eb i mindonello i coanna.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 B.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Ily\'eb Eldar av\'e1nier Ambarello.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 C.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 I Naucor ut\'falier i orontillon; elendient\'eb i coannar ar s\'facar limpelma.}{\i\lang3081 
\par D.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 I \'fami\'eb ohtari mapuvar i malta lielmava mentien harmalmar haira n\'f3renna.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 E.}{\b\lang3081  I n\'eds oant\'eb coanyallo ar lend\'eb i s\'edrenna.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 F.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 I minya cirya tuluva N\'famello.
\par }{\i\lang3081 G.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Quen ruc\'eb i r\'e1villon, an am\'e1tient\'eb i aran liemmo, ar \'favant\'eb auta n\'f3remmallo.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 H. }{\b\lang3081 Equ\'eb Nessim\'eb Calandilenna: "Yondonya av\'e1ni\'eb sambenyallo!"
\par }{\lang3081 
\par 2. Translate into Quenya }{\fs20\lang3081 (and notice that inclusive "our" is meant to be a plural pronoun throughout, since the exact form of the ending for }{\i\fs20\lang3081 dual}{\fs20\lang3081  inclusive "our" cannot be reconstructed with certainty):

\par }{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 I.}{\lang3081  Calandil said to Nessim\'eb: "Your son has gone out of the house, for all the boys went to the hill."
\par }{\i\lang3081 J.}{\lang3081  From heaven [}{\b\lang3081 Menel}{\lang3081 : the sky] the sun is giving light to our }{\i\lang3081 (inclusive)}{\lang3081  world, and the darkness has passed.
\par }{\i\lang3081 K. }{\lang3081 Calandil said to the evil king: "You have sent your warriors to the tower to find my sons. My thrall will protect the boys, and they will not be lost!"}{\b\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 L}{\lang3081 . The man having [}{\b\lang3081 arwa}{\lang3081 ] the ships wanted to leave, and all the ships went away west[wards].}{\b\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 M.}{\lang3081  We }{\i\lang3081 (exclusive)}{\lang3081  went to a two-room apartment }{\i\lang3081 [dual of }{\b\i\lang3081 samb\'eb}{\i\lang3081 !]}{\lang3081 , and the man from the hills gave your son a great sword, saying [}{\b\lang3081 
qu\'e9tala}{\lang3081 ]: "The sword comes from a remote land, out of the outermost West." }{\i\fs20\lang3081 ("Outermost": use the superlative of }{\b\i\fs20\lang3081 haira}{\i\fs20\lang3081 .)
\par }{\i\lang3081 N}{\lang3081 . All trees died and disappeared from our }{\i\lang3081 (incl.)}{\lang3081  land, and Calandil and Nessim\'eb said: "We }{\i\lang3081 (excl.)}{\lang3081  will send our }{\i\lang3081 (excl.)}{\lang3081 
 thralls to find a land with }{\i\lang3081 [or, 'having' = }{\b\i\lang3081 arwa}{\i\lang3081 ]}{\lang3081  many trees."
\par }{\i\lang3081 O.}{\lang3081  The maiden said to the animal: "I fear [/I'm afraid of] your big horns }{\i\lang3081 (dual)}{\lang3081 ."
\par }{\i\lang3081 P}{\lang3081 . I went to our }{\i\lang3081 (incl.)}{\lang3081  room to gather my things, for I wanted to give my brother my first book; the book lay [/was lying] on the floor.
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 ADDITIONAL EXERCISES}{\lang3081 
\par }{\fs20\lang3081 involving Quenya nouns combining pronominal endings with suffixes for number and/or case 
\par }{\lang3081 
\par (Students may check the keys to the exercises above before proceeding to these exercises.) There exercises above include several examples of nouns with both pronominal endings and case endings, e.g. }{\b\cf5\lang3081 lie}{\b\cf2\lang3081 lma}{
\b\cf6\lang3081 va}{\lang3081  "}{\cf6\lang3081 of}{\lang3081  }{\cf2\lang3081 our}{\lang3081  }{\cf5\lang3081 people}{\lang3081 ". A skilled Quenyaist would be able to extract the meaning of such forms at a glance, indeed perceiving a single word like }{
\b\lang3081 ostolmallon}{\lang3081  as something like a single meaning, "from our cities", without having to consciously break this down into }{\b\lang3081 osto-lma-llo-n}{\lang3081  "city-our-from-plural". Of course, a skilled Quenyaist would a
lso be able to readily }{\i\lang3081 produce}{\lang3081  such words, combining the relevant endings without hesitation.
\par 
\par 3. Translate the following list of single Quenya words into English phrases. 
\par }{\fs20\lang3081 NOTE: In the keys to this exercise, the following simplified "equivalents" are used
: genitives and possessive-adjectival forms are all turned into "of"-constructions, dative forms are represented as prepositional phrases in "for", whereas allative and ablative forms are represented as phrases involving the prepositions "to" and "from", 
respectively. The same system is used in the English-to-Quenya exercises below, with specification of whether "of" is to be rendered as a genitive (}{\i\fs20\lang3081 gen.}{\fs20\lang3081 ) or a possessive-adjectival (}{\i\fs20\lang3081 poss.}{
\fs20\lang3081 ) form. \endash  In these exercises, there are also a few examples of the suffix for dual inclusive "our", though conveniently always with the genitive ending attached, since we know with certainty (from the attested example }{
\b\fs20\lang3081 omentielvo}{\fs20\lang3081 ) what form it then assumes.
\par }{\lang3081 
\par a) }{\b\lang3081 Coalmallon}{\lang3081 
\par b) }{\b\lang3081 Hroanyan}{\lang3081 
\par c) }{\b\lang3081 Hroalmain}{\lang3081 
\par d) }{\b\lang3081 Lambelmar}{\lang3081 
\par e) }{\b\lang3081 N\'f3relyanna}{\lang3081 
\par f) }{\b\lang3081 Engwemmar}{\lang3081 
\par g) }{\b\lang3081 Aranelyallo}{\lang3081 
\par h) }{\b\lang3081 M\'f3linyo}{\lang3081 
\par i) }{\b\lang3081 M\'f3linyaron}{\lang3081 
\par j) }{\b\lang3081 Ostolmannar}{\lang3081 
\par k) }{\b\lang3081 Lielvo}{\lang3081 
\par l) }{\b\lang3081 Yondolyava}{\lang3081 
\par m) }{\b\lang3081 Sambemmat}{\lang3081 
\par n) }{\b\lang3081 Sambenyant}{\lang3081 
\par o) }{\b\lang3081 Sambelyato}{\lang3081 
\par p) }{\b\lang3081 Sambelmanta}{\lang3081 
\par q) }{\b\lang3081 Sambelyalto}{\lang3081 
\par r) }{\b\lang3081 Lienyava}{\lang3081 
\par s) }{\b\lang3081 Yondolmaiva}{\lang3081 
\par t) }{\b\lang3081 T\'e1rilyan}{\lang3081 
\par u) }{\b\lang3081 Liemmaiva}{\lang3081 
\par v) }{\b\lang3081 Nerinyaiva}{\lang3081 
\par w) }{\b\lang3081 Nerinyava}{\lang3081 
\par x) }{\b\lang3081 Seldonyain}{\lang3081 
\par y) }{\b\lang3081 Ciryammalto
\par }{\lang3081 z) }{\b\lang3081 Yondolvo
\par }{\lang3081 
\par 4. Translate into single Quenya words ("of" = genitive or possessive as further specified, "for" = dative, "to" = allative, "from" = ablative):
\par 
\par a) To your hills
\par b) For our }{\i\lang3081 (excl.)}{\lang3081  peace
\par c)Your two-volume book }{\i\lang3081 (use a dual form of }{\b\i\lang3081 parma}{\i\lang3081 )}{\lang3081 
\par d) To your tower / To your towers }{\i\lang3081 (translate the sg. and pl. separately)}{\lang3081 
\par e) Of }{\i\lang3081 (poss.)}{\lang3081  our }{\i\lang3081 (excl.)}{\lang3081  queen
\par f) Of }{\i\lang3081 (poss.)}{\lang3081  my sisters
\par g) From my sister
\par h) Of }{\i\lang3081 (gen.)}{\lang3081  our }{\i\lang3081 (incl.)}{\lang3081  gifts
\par i) Of }{\i\lang3081 (gen.)}{\lang3081  our }{\i\lang3081 (incl.)}{\lang3081  gold
\par j) For our }{\i\lang3081 (incl.)}{\lang3081  joy
\par k) Of }{\i\lang3081 (gen.)}{\lang3081  your wine
\par l) From your world
\par m) Of }{\i\lang3081 (gen.)}{\lang3081  my sun
\par n) For my king
\par o) Of }{\i\lang3081 (poss.)}{\lang3081  our }{\i\lang3081 (excl.)}{\lang3081  son
\par p) Of }{\i\lang3081 (gen.)}{\lang3081  our }{\i\lang3081 (excl.)}{\lang3081  cups
\par q) For your pair of birds }{\i\lang3081 (use a dual form of }{\b\i\lang3081 aiw\'eb}{\i\lang3081 )}{\lang3081 
\par r) To our }{\i\lang3081 (excl.)}{\lang3081  double walls }{\i\lang3081 (use a dual form of }{\b\i\lang3081 ramba}{\i\lang3081 )}{\lang3081 
\par s) From our }{\i\lang3081 (incl.)}{\lang3081  double walls }{\i\lang3081 (same)}{\lang3081 
\par t) From your lands
\par u) Of }{\i\lang3081 (gen.)}{\lang3081  my [two twin] sisters }{\i\lang3081 (use a dual form of }{\b\i\lang3081 seler}{\i\lang3081 , }{\b\i\lang3081 sell}{\i\lang3081 -)}{\lang3081 
\par v) Of }{\i\lang3081 (gen.)}{\lang3081  our }{\i\lang3081 (excl.)}{\lang3081  treasures
\par w) To our }{\i\lang3081 (incl.)}{\lang3081  horses
\par x) Of }{\i\lang3081 (gen.)}{\lang3081  our }{\i\lang3081 (dual incl.)}{\lang3081  house }{\i\lang3081 (= "of the house of the two of us")}{\lang3081 
\par y) For my brother
\par z) To our }{\i\lang3081 (excl.)}{\lang3081  trees}{
\par }{\lang3081 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs36\cf6\lang3081 LESSON FIFTEEN}{\b\fs32\lang3081 
\par The ending -}{\b\i\fs32\lang3081 rya}{\b\fs32\lang3081  and more about possessive pronominal endings. The Locative case. Relative sentences. Third Person obscurities.
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 MORE ABOUT POSSESSIVE PRONOMINAL ENDINGS
\par }{\b\fs20\cf2\lang3081 (plus a slightly digressive inquiry into the true nature of the combinations }{\b\i\fs20\cf2\lang3081 ly}{\b\fs20\cf2\lang3081 , }{\b\i\fs20\cf2\lang3081 ny}{\b\fs20\cf2\lang3081 , }{\b\i\fs20\cf2\lang3081 ry}{\b\fs20\cf2\lang3081 
, }{\b\i\fs20\cf2\lang3081 ty}{\b\fs20\cf2\lang3081 )
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 
\par }{\lang3081 In the previous lesson we introduced a series of possessive pronominal endings that can be added to nouns: -}{\b\lang3081 nya}{\lang3081  "my", -}{\b\lang3081 lya}{\lang3081  "your", -}{\b\lang3081 lma}{\lang3081  "our" (incl.) and -}{
\b\lang3081 mma}{\lang3081  "our" (excl.); furthermore, there is an ending for }{\i\lang3081 dual}{\lang3081  inclusive "our", either -}{\b\lang3081 lva}{\lang3081  or -}{\b\lang3081 lwa}{\lang3081  (only attested in the form -}{\b\lang3081 lvo}{
\lang3081  with the genitive ending -}{\b\lang3081 o}{\lang3081  added). Ignoring a strange variant of the ending -}{\b\lang3081 lya}{\lang3081  "your" (-}{\b\lang3081 lda}{\lang3081 ), only one o
f the attested pronominal endings remains to be mentioned: -}{\b\lang3081 rya}{\lang3081 . It occurs twice in }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081 . The first time it is followed by the genitive ending, regularly producing the form -}{\b\lang3081 ryo}{
\lang3081 : The relevant word if }{\b\lang3081 \'f3maryo}{\lang3081 , translated "of her voice", the genitive form of }{\b\lang3081 \'f3marya}{\lang3081  "her voice". The word }{\b\lang3081 \'f3ma}{\lang3081 
 "voice" is attested by itself elsewhere (Etym., entry }{\i\lang3081 OM}{\lang3081 ; VT39:16).
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 The second time -}{\b\lang3081 rya}{\lang3081  occurs in }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081 , it also has another ending following it, in this case the dual marker -}{\b\lang3081 t}{\lang3081 
: the word }{\b\lang3081 m\'e1ryat}{\lang3081  is translated "her hands", referring to a natural pair of hands (the word }{\b\lang3081 m\'e1}{\lang3081  "hand" is also attested by itself). Anyhow, the ending -}{\b\lang3081 rya}{\lang3081 
 is seen to mean "her", and from the }{\i\lang3081 Namari\'eb}{\lang3081  examples it is clear that it can be used and combined with other endings just like any of the other pronominal suffixes we have already discussed and practiced (}{\b\lang3081 
samberya}{\lang3081  "her room", }{\b\lang3081 samberyan}{\lang3081  "for her room", }{\b\lang3081 samberyanna}{\lang3081  "to her room", }{\b\lang3081 samberyallo}{\lang3081  "from her room", }{\b\lang3081 samberyo}{\lang3081  and }{\b\lang3081 
samberyava}{\lang3081  "of her room"...and so on with plural and dual forms: }{\b\lang3081 samberyar}{\lang3081  "her rooms", }{\b\lang3081 samberyat}{\lang3081  "her couple of rooms/her two-room apartment", etc. etc.)
\par For thirty years, from }{\i\lang3081 The Fellowship of the Ring}{\lang3081  (with }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081  in it) appeared in 1954 until Christopher Tolkien published }{\i\lang3081 The War of the Jewels}{\lang3081 
 in 1994, "her" was the sole known meaning of the ending -}{\b\lang3081 rya}{\lang3081 . In the meantime, we had one more example of -}{\b\lang3081 rya}{\lang3081  = "her" in the Markirya poem, which was published in }{\i\lang3081 
The Monsters and the Critics}{\lang3081  in 1983 (though in Markirya, "her" does not refer to a person, but to a ship). But when WJ appeared in 1994, it became evident that the suffix -}{\b\lang3081 rya}{\lang3081 
 actually covers not only "her", but also "his": }{\b\lang3081 Coarya}{\lang3081  is shown to be the Quenya for "the house of him" or "his house" (WJ:369, there spelt }{\b\lang3081 k\'f6arya}{\lang3081 ). Of course, the form }{\b\lang3081 coarya}{
\lang3081  as such could just as well mean "}{\i\lang3081 her}{\lang3081  house", and conversely the }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081  forms }{\b\lang3081 m\'e1ryat}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 \'f3maryo}{\lang3081  could in another context mean "}{
\i\lang3081 his}{\lang3081  hands" and "of }{\i\lang3081 his}{\lang3081  voice": We have to conclude that Quenya simply does not make a distinction between "his" and "her". Indeed it is entirely possible that -}{\b\lang3081 rya}{\lang3081 
 covers "its" as well (see below) \endash  so that there is one single ending for the entire third person singular in the table of possessive pronouns. The English translation would depend on the context, of course.
\par There is more to learn from the two examples of -}{\b\lang3081 rya}{\lang3081  in }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081 . Notice the dual form }{\b\lang3081 m\'e1ryat}{\lang3081  "her (pair of) hands". As described in Lesson Three, }{\lang1033 
Quenya developed a system whereby -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  is the normal dual ending, ordinarily replaced by -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  only where euphonic concerns demand this, as when the word that is to receive a dual ending already includes }{
\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 d}{\lang1033  (Letters:427, footnote).}{\lang3081  But in Lesson Three we also argued from the example }{\b\lang3081 peu}{\lang3081 
 "(pair of) lips" that body-parts occurring in pairs occur in "fossilized" dual forms, always taking the ending -}{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081  \endash  "}{\lang1033 reflecting the older system in which only -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 
 denoted a natural or logical pair". Nonetheless, the student may also remember a parenthetical warning to the effect that "the other ending -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  may however be used if certain other endings intrude before the dual e
nding itself; we will return to this in a later lesson". It is time to have a closer look on this.
\par It has often been assumed that removing the ending -}{\b\lang1033 rya}{\lang1033  "her" from }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1ryat}{\lang1033  "her hands" would simply leave us with }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1t}{\lang1033  "(a pair of) hands". Yet since the dual form of }{
\b\lang1033 p\'e9}{\lang1033  "lip" is attested as }{\b\lang1033 peu}{\lang1033 , we might reasonably assume that the dual form of }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1}{\lang1033  "hand" is likewise }{\b\lang1033 mau}{\lang1033 
 "pair of hands", though the latter form remains unattested. If the noun that normally has a dual form in -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  is to receive a possessive pronominal suffix, it seems that the dual ending -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 
 is suppressed and duality is instead expressed by means of the ending -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , suffixed }{\i\lang1033 after}{\lang1033  the pronominal suffix \endash  as in }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1rya}{\b\ul\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 
. Though the dual "(pair of) lips" is }{\b\lang1033 peu}{\lang1033 , we can assume that "her (two) lips" would be constructed by starting from the singular form }{\b\lang1033 p\'e9}{\lang1033  "lip" and adding -}{\b\lang1033 rya}{\lang1033 
 for "his/her" and then -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  for dual number, so that as a parallel to }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1ryat}{\lang1033  we would see }{\b\lang1033 p\'e9ryat}{\lang1033 . (It then follows that the genitive is }{\b\lang1033 p\'e9ryato}{\lang1033 
, the dative }{\b\lang1033 p\'e9ryant}{\lang1033 , the allative }{\b\lang1033 p\'e9ryanta}{\lang1033 , the ablative }{\b\lang1033 p\'e9ryalto}{\lang1033 , etc.) }{\b\lang1033 Aldu}{\lang1033 
 may be the normal dual "pair of trees", but "her pair of trees" would }{\i\lang1033 perhaps}{\lang1033  be constructed from the singular }{\b\lang1033 alda}{\lang1033  with the appropriate suffixes, producing }{\b\lang1033 aldaryat}{\lang1033 
. Even so, we may suspect that the dual ending -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  could function as a connecting}{\i\lang1033  }{\lang1033 vowel where one is needed \endash  just as the }{\i\lang1033 plural}{\lang1033  ending -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 
 is known to function in certain instances. The word for "foot" is }{\b\lang1033 t\'e1l}{\lang1033  with stem }{\b\lang1033 tal}{\lang1033 -, so perhaps the dual "(pair of) feet" is }{\b\lang1033 talu}{\lang1033 . Adding a possessive pronominal ending to 
}{\b\lang1033 t\'e1l}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 tal}{\lang1033 - would however require a connecting vowel before we can even think about adding -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 
 as a dual marker at the end of the word. Should "her pair of feet" perhaps be something like }{\b\lang1033 taluryat}{\lang1033  with double dual markers, -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 - and -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , just like there would ap
parently be double }{\i\lang1033 plural}{\lang1033  markers (-}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 - and -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 ) in a plural word like (say) }{\b\lang1033 talimmar}{\lang1033 
 "our feet"? If so, this would be an exception to the apparent rule that the dual marker -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  is not used before a possessive pronominal suffix. As usual, we lack attested exa
mples, but since Elendil's Declaration indicates that "my heirs" is }{\b\lang1033 hildinyar}{\lang1033 , it would not be wildly implausible to assume that a corresponding dual form would be something very much like }{\b\lang1033 hildunyat}{\lang1033 
. (Or maybe the rule that -}{\b\lang1033 nya}{\lang1033  "my" prefers -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 - as its connecting vowel would prevail, producing }{\b\lang1033 hildinyat}{\lang1033 , but we might still see -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 
- as a connecting vowel before other pronominal endings, e.g. }{\b\lang1033 hilduryat}{\lang1033  "her pair of heirs".)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par Another thing to be learnt from the }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  examples }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1ryat}{\lang1033  "her hands" and }{\b\lang1033 \'f3maryo}{\lang1033  "of her voice" has to do with whether }{\b\lang1033 ry}{\lang1033 
 here counts as a consonant cluster (}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 y}{\lang1033 ) or as a single consonant: palatalized }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 
. What we learn is however somewhat paradoxical. We touched on these problems already in Lesson One, but a new inquiry may be in place here, since the combinations in -}{\b\lang1033 y}{\lang1033  (like }{\b\lang1033 ry}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ly}{
\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ny}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ty}{\lang1033 ) occur in several of the possessive pronominal endings. Tolkien repeatedly indicated that }{\b\lang1033 \'f3maryo}{\lang1033  is accented on the }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 
 in the second-to-last syllable (in one of his }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  transcripts in RGEO, he indicated all major and minor stresses in this song, and we also have }{\i\lang1033 two}{\lang1033 
 actual recordings where he is heard to use this accentuation). For }{\b\lang1033 \'f3maryo}{\lang1033  to be accented in such a way, }{\b\lang1033 ry}{\lang1033  must count as a consonant cluster, not as a single consonant. If }{\b\lang1033 ry}{
\lang1033  were a single consonant, the normal rules dictate that the stress would not land on the vowel before it, but on the third syllable from the end.
\par \tab Yet we have repeatedly referred to another observed rule of Quenya phonology: there cannot be a long vowel in front of a consonant cluster. Thus the long vowel of }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1}{\lang1033 
 "hand" is logically shortened in the plural allative form }{\b\lang1033 mannar}{\lang1033  "into...hands", attested in }{\i\lang1033 F\'edriel's Song}{\lang1033 . **}{\b\lang1033 M\'e1nnar}{\lang1033  would not be a possible Quenya word. So if }{
\b\lang1033 ry}{\lang1033  is also a consonant cluster as we thought we had just established, why is }{\b\lang1033 \'e1}{\lang1033  not shortened in the form }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1ryat}{\lang1033 ? Why don't we see ?}{\b\lang1033 m}{\b\ul\lang1033 a}{
\b\lang1033 ryat}{\lang1033  as a parallel to }{\b\lang1033 m}{\b\ul\lang1033 a}{\b\lang1033 nnar}{\lang1033 ?
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Frankly, I can't think of any obvious explanation. Apparently we must simply accept that }{\b\lang1033 ry}{\lang1033  \endash  as well as }{\b\lang1033 ly}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ny}{\lang1033 
, }{\b\lang1033 ty}{\lang1033  \endash  count as consonant clusters for the purpose of stress, but a preceding long vowel does not have to be shortened. Thus we would have }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1rya}{\lang1033  "his/her hand", }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1nya}{
\lang1033  "my hand" and }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1lya}{\lang1033  "your hand" with the preceding long vowel intact. Before the other attest
ed pronominal suffixes, it would have to be shortened, since these endings unquestionably introduce a following consonant cluster: }{\b\lang1033 malma}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 mamma}{\lang1033  = "our hand" (inclusive and exclusive). **}{\b\lang1033 
M\'e1lma}{\lang1033 , **}{\b\lang1033 m\'e1mma}{\lang1033  would hardly be possible Quenya words. Such variations would closely parallel a couple of attested forms we have referred to earlier, though they involve subject endings (-}{\b\lang1033 mm\'eb}{
\lang1033  for "we" and -}{\b\lang1033 ny\'eb}{\lang1033  for "I") rather than the pronominal possessive endings added to nouns: The exclamation }{\b\lang1033 v\'e1}{\lang1033  signifying refusal has its long vowel }{\i\lang1033 shortened}{\lang1033 
 before the cluster }{\b\lang1033 mm}{\lang1033  in }{\b\lang1033 vamm\'eb}{\lang1033  "we won't", but the long vowel is seem to }{\i\lang1033 persist}{\lang1033  in }{\b\lang1033 v\'e1ny\'eb}{\lang1033  "I won't" (WJ:371). So we can tell that while }{
\b\lang1033 mm}{\lang1033  is unquestionably a cluster, }{\b\lang1033 ny}{\lang1033  may well count as a single consonant \endash  palatalized }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  like Spanish }{\i\lang1033 \'f1}{\lang1033 .}{
\par }{\lang1033 There are only a handful of nouns that can be affected by these variations in vowel-length, words of a single syllable that end in a long vowel: Besides }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1}{\lang1033  "hand", only }{\b\lang1033 c\'fa}{\lang1033  "bow", }{
\b\lang1033 p\'e9}{\lang1033  "lip", }{\b\lang1033 r\'e9}{\lang1033  "day" (24 hours) and }{\b\lang1033 l\'fa}{\lang1033  "time, occasion" spring to mind \endash 
 if we don't bring in Tolkien's early "Qenya" material as well. Of course, the long vowels of these words would also be shortened before }{\i\lang1033 case endings}{\lang1033  introducing a following consonant cluster, as indicated by the plural allative 
}{\b\lang1033 mannar}{\lang1033  "into hands" in }{\i\lang1033 F\'edriel's Song}{\lang1033 . But "into }{\i\lang1033 your}{\lang1033  hands" would evidently be }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1lyannar}{\lang1033 , or }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1lyanta}{\lang1033 
 as a dual form \endash  since }{\b\lang1033 ly}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ny}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ry}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ty}{\lang1033  do not count as consonant clusters for this purpose.
\par On the other hand, there is also some evidence suggesting that these combinations }{\i\lang1033 should}{\lang1033  be taken as clusters. In a }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  manuscript reproduced in RGEO:76, Tolkien split the word }{\b\lang1033 
\'f3maryo}{\lang1033  into its constituent syllables and seemingly indicated that -}{\b\lang1033 ar}{\lang1033 - and -}{\b\lang1033 yo}{\lang1033  are separate syllables \endash  as if }{\b\lang1033 ry}{\lang1033 
 is a genuine consonant cluster after all, not just palatalized }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 . (Sure enough, }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  would probably be palatalized before }{\b\lang1033 y}{\lang1033 , but if }{\b\lang1033 y}{\lang1033 
 is also to be sounded as a distinct consonant, we would still have a cluster.) Likewise, Tolkien split the words }{\b\lang1033 fanyar}{\lang1033  "clouds" and }{\b\lang1033 ily\'eb}{\lang1033  "all" into }{\b\lang1033 fan}{\lang1033 /}{\b\lang1033 yar}{
\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 il}{\lang1033 /}{\b\lang1033 y\'eb}{\lang1033 . If }{\b\lang1033 ry}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ny}{\lang1033 , and }{\b\lang1033 ly}{\lang1033 , and by implication }{\b\lang1033 ty}{\lang1033 
 as well, really are to be taken as consonant clusters when they occur in the middle of words, that would explain the observed stress patterns. But then we are left with the problem of why long vowels are not shortened before 
these combinations. Luckily, these seeming inconsistencies cause no problems to people trying to }{\i\lang1033 write}{\lang1033  in Quenya, since we can simply imitate the system or systems that Tolkien used.
\par Even so, I haven't bored the student with the paragraphs above only as an academic exercise, for there remains the problem of how }{\b\lang1033 ly}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ny}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ry}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ty}{\lang1033 
 occurring in the middle of words should really be pronounced: Are we dealing with }{\i\lang1033 single}{\lang1033 , unitary palatalized consonants, }{\i\lang1033 long}{\lang1033  palatalized consonants, or single consonants }{\i\lang1033 followed}{
\lang1033  by a distinct }{\b\lang1033 y}{\lang1033 ? It seems that we can't reach any definite answer based on what has been published so far. When Tolkien in RGEO:76 syllabified }{\b\lang1033 fanyar}{\lang1033  as }{\b\lang1033 fan}{\lang1033 /}{
\b\lang1033 yar}{\lang1033 , it seems to demonstrate that he at least can't have the pronunciation **}{\i\lang1033 fa\'f1-ar}{\lang1033  in mind, though palatals like }{\b\lang1033 ny}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 ty}{\lang1033 
 must always be pronounced as single, unitary consonants when they occur initially (as Quenya cannot have consonant clusters at the beginning of words: SD:416-417). The choice apparently stands between }{\i\lang1033 fa\'f1-\'f1ar}{\lang1033 
 (with a long or double palatal }{\i\lang1033 \'f1}{\lang1033 ) and }{\i\lang1033 fan-yar}{\lang1033  or rather }{\i\lang1033 fa\'f1-yar}{\lang1033  (a distinct }{\i\lang1033 y}{\lang1033  being sounded). In either case, a word like }{\b\lang1033 atarinya
}{\lang1033  "my father" (that is, }{\i\lang1033 atari\'f1\'f1a}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 atari\'f1ya}{\lang1033 ) would then logically be accented on the }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  according to the normal rules. Why this combination }{\b\lang1033 ny}
{\lang1033 , as well as }{\b\lang1033 ly}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ry}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ty}{\lang1033 , apparently lack the power to make a preceding long vowel become short remains a mystery. If they are pronounced with a distinct }{
\b\lang1033 y}{\lang1033 , as I tend to think, these combinations may not be counted as regular consonant clusters because }{\b\lang1033 y}{\lang1033  is a "semi-vowel" rather than a quite "proper" consonant.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 Possessive pronominal endings used with infinitives:}{\lang1033  In Lesson Ten we described how infinitive forms of verbs have an extended form in -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033  which is used when the infinitive is to receive a suffix den
oting an object pronoun: thus }{\b\lang1033 car\'eb}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 cari}{\lang1033 -) "to do", but }{\b\lang1033 carita}{\b\ul\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  "to do }{\ul\lang1033 it}{\lang1033 " or "doing }{\ul\lang1033 it}{\lang1033 
". To such an extended infinitive it is also possible to add a pronominal ending denoting the }{\i\lang1033 subject}{\lang1033  of the verbal action. Our attested example is }{\b\lang1033 caritalya}{\lang1033 (}{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 ), which T
olkien translated "your doing (it)" (VT41:17). "You" is here the subject of the verbal action (that is, the "doing"), and this is expressed as a }{\i\lang1033 possessive}{\lang1033  pronominal ending -}{\b\lang1033 lya}{\lang1033 
 "your". A second pronominal ending, denoting the }{\i\lang1033 object}{\lang1033 , may then be added at the end of the word: }{\b\lang1033 carita}{\b\cf6\lang1033 lya}{\b\cf2\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 , "}{\cf6\lang1033 your}{\lang1033  doing }{
\cf2\lang1033 it}{\lang1033 ", }{\b\lang1033 tirita}{\b\cf6\lang1033 nya}{\b\cf2\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  "}{\cf6\lang1033 my}{\lang1033  watching }{\cf2\lang1033 them}{\lang1033 
". Such a phrase can probably be used as a noun, functioning, for instance, as the subject or object of a sentence. Perhaps "I want you to watch them" would be expressed something like }{\b\lang1033 merin tiritalyat}{\lang1033 
, literally "I want your watching them". The object of the infinitive could certainly be an independent word as well, e.g. }{\b\lang1033 merin tiritalya i seldor}{\lang1033 , "I want you to watch the boys" ("I want your watching the boys"). }{\i\lang1033 

\par }{\lang1033 \tab By their meaning, such infinitives would come very close to gerunds. Indeed we must assume that regular gerunds (in -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033 ) may also receive possessive pronominal endings, e.g. }{\b\lang1033 tulierya}{\lang1033 
 "his coming" (}{\b\lang1033 tuli\'eb}{\lang1033  "coming"). It is, however, uncertain whether a second pronominal ending denoting the }{\i\lang1033 object}{\lang1033  may then be suffixed (?}{\b\lang1033 carieryas}{\lang1033  "his doing it").
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 THE LOCATIVE CASE}{\cf2\lang3081 
\par }{\lang1033 In connection with the forms }{\b\lang1033 mir}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 minna}{\lang1033  "into" we have referred to the Quenya preposition }{\b\lang1033 mi}{\lang1033  "in", which is sometimes combined with the definite article to produc
e the form (}{\b\lang1033 mi}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  =) }{\b\lang1033 m\'ed}{\lang1033  "in the". It occurs in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 , in the phrase }{\b\lang1033 m\'ed oromardi}{\lang1033 
, translated "in the high halls" (so in RGEO:66, at least \endash  the text in LotR has }{\b\lang1033 mi}{\lang1033  with a short vowel, though this should be a simple "in" with no article incorporated, and 
indeed the translation provided in LotR goes simply "}{\i\lang1033 in}{\lang1033  lofty halls").
\par \tab Yet Quenya often dispenses with prepositions, using special case forms instead, as when "to, towards" is normally expressed by the allative ending -}{\b\lang1033 nna}{\lang1033 , whereas "from" is usually expressed by means of the ablative ending -}{
\b\lang1033 llo}{\lang1033  \endash  though Quenya does have separate prepositions that could express the same meanings. It should be no surprise, then, that Quenya instead of using a preposition like }{\b\lang1033 mi}{\lang1033 
 often prefers a specific case form in order to express the meaning of "in" (or "on, upon"). The relevant case is called the }{\i\lang1033 locative}{\lang1033 , marked by the ending -}{\b\lang1033 ss\'eb}{\lang1033 
 (probably inspired by the Finnish ending -}{\i\lang1033 ssa}{\lang1033 , -}{\i\lang1033 ss\'e4}{\lang1033  of similar meaning). For instance, "in a house" can be expressed as }{\b\lang1033 coass\'eb}{\lang1033 , "in the house" could be }{\b\lang1033 
i coass\'eb}{\lang1033 , "in my house" would be }{\b\lang1033 coanyass\'eb}{\lang1033 
, etc. (Of course, the stress moves to the vowel immediately preceding the case ending, since the ending begins in a consonant cluster.) The locative can refer to "location" in }{\i\lang1033 time}{\lang1033  as well as space: In 
an early version of the greeting "a star shines }{\ul\lang1033 on}{\lang1033  the hour of our meeting", Tolkien had the noun }{\b\lang1033 l\'fam\'eb}{\lang1033  "hour" appearing in the locative case (}{\b\lang1033 l\'fame}{\b\ul\lang1033 ss\'eb}{
\lang1033 , RS:324).
\par 
\par }{\fs20\lang1033 NOTE 1: Students should notice that the ending -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 ss\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  is not }{\i\fs20\lang1033 always}{\fs20\lang1033  a locative marker, meaning "in" or "on" wherever it occurs. Sometimes -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 ss\'eb}
{\fs20\lang1033  functions as an abstract ending. We have already introduced the noun }{\b\fs20\lang1033 alass\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  "joy, merriment". }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Entuless\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033 
 is attested as the name of a ship, said to mean "Return" (UT:171; }{\b\fs20\lang1033 entul}{\fs20\lang1033 - would be the verb "to re-come" = "to return"). }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Caimass\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  could be the locative form of }{\b\fs20\lang1033 
caima}{\fs20\lang1033  "bed", but }{\b\fs20\lang1033 caimass\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  is also used as a noun "lying in bed" = "sickness", and this is even the basis of the adjective }{\b\fs20\lang1033 caimass\'eba}{\fs20\lang1033 
 "bedridden, sick" (Etym., entry }{\i\fs20\lang1033 KAY}{\fs20\lang1033 ). Sometimes -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 ss\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  as a noun ending is not abstract, but it is seen to maintain the connotations of }{\i\fs20\lang1033 locality}{\fs20\lang1033 
 that it also has when used as a locative ending: The noun }{\b\fs20\lang1033 aicass\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  "mountain peak" is derived from the adjective }{\b\fs20\lang1033 aica}{\fs20\lang1033  "sharp", so the term }{\b\fs20\lang1033 aicass\'eb}{
\fs20\lang1033  basically refers to some kind of 'sharp place'. The ending -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 ss\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  also turns up in the names of a couple of the months of the Elvish calendar, listed in LotR Appendix D: }{\b\fs20\lang1033 V\'edress\'eb
}{\fs20\lang1033  and }{\b\fs20\lang1033 L\'f3tess\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033 , roughly corresponding to April and May. The meaning of the word }{\b\fs20\lang1033 V\'edress\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  is uncertain, but }{\b\fs20\lang1033 L\'f3tess\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033 
 certainly connects with }{\b\fs20\lang1033 l\'f3t\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  "flower" and would seem to mean essentially "In Flower", a fitting description of the month of May. \endash  Whether the locative ending -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 ss\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033 
 could or should be attached to a noun already ending in -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 ss\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  is uncertain. }{\b\fs20\lang1033 L\'f3tessess\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  does seem like a rather cumbersome way of expressing "in May", and }{\b\fs20\lang1033 
aicassess\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  for "on a mountain peak" is not much better. Instead of adding the locative ending to nouns of such a shape, it may be better to use the preposition }{\b\fs20\lang1033 mi}{\fs20\lang1033  "in": }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Mi L\'f3
tess\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033 , }{\b\fs20\lang1033 mi aicass\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033 .}{\lang1033 
\par 
\par }{\fs20\lang1033 NOTE 2: As we remember, the }{\i\fs20\lang1033 allative}{\fs20\lang1033  case in -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 nna}{\fs20\lang1033 
 does not always denote motion towards something, but may also express the idea of "on, upon". In some contexts, it would perhaps be permissible to use either the locative or the allative, resulting in pretty much the same meaning (}{\b\fs20\lang1033 
caitan caimanya}{\b\fs20\cf6\lang1033 ss\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  = "I lie }{\fs20\cf6\lang1033 in}{\fs20\lang1033  my bed" / }{\b\fs20\lang1033 caitan caimanya}{\b\fs20\cf2\lang1033 nna}{\fs20\lang1033  "I lie }{\fs20\cf2\lang1033 on}{\fs20\lang1033 
 my bed"). Yet Tolkien sometimes translated a Quenya locative form using the English preposition "upon". Cf. for instance }{\b\fs20\lang1033 ciryass\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  "upon a ship" (MC:216, there spelt }{\b\fs20\lang1033 kiryasse}{\fs20\lang1033 
); cf. also }{\b\fs20\lang1033 mahalmassen}{\fs20\lang1033  below.
\par 
\par }{\lang1033 \tab In the }{\i\lang1033 plural}{\lang1033 , the simple locative suffix -}{\b\lang1033 ss\'eb}{\lang1033  is expanded with the same plural element -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 
 that is also seen in the plural forms of the endings for genitive (-}{\b\lang1033 on}{\lang1033 ) and ablative (-}{\b\lang1033 llon}{\lang1033 ). Thus, plural locative forms end in -}{\b\lang1033 ssen}{\lang1033 . The plural locative of }{\b\lang1033 
mahalma}{\lang1033  "throne" occurs in Cirion's Oath, where the Valar are referred to as }{\b\lang1033 i h\'e1rar mahalma}{\b\ul\lang1033 ssen}{\b\lang1033  mi N\'famen}{\lang1033 , "those who sit }{\ul\lang1033 upon}{\lang1033 
 [the] thrones in the West".
\par \tab The }{\i\lang1033 dual}{\lang1033  locative ending is formed by substituting the dual element }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  for the first of the }{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 's of the ending -}{\b\lang1033 ss\'eb}{\lang1033 . The resulting ending -}{
\b\lang1033 ts\'eb}{\lang1033  is not attested in any actual Quenya composition by Tolkien, but he listed it in the Plotz letter, so presumably we can have forms like }{\b\lang1033 sambets\'eb}{\lang1033  "in a two-room apartment" or }{\b\lang1033 
ciryanyats\'eb}{\lang1033  "on my [two sister] ships". (These words may be seen as the simplest dual forms }{\b\lang1033 sambet}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ciryanyat}{\lang1033  with the locative ending -}{\b\lang1033 ss\'eb}{\lang1033 
 attached, though it is simplified to -}{\b\lang1033 s\'eb}{\lang1033  to avoid the impossible combination **-}{\b\lang1033 tss\'eb}{\lang1033 .)
\par \tab Of course, endings like -}{\b\lang1033 ss\'eb}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 ssen}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 ts\'eb}{\lang1033 
 can never be added directly to a noun ending in a consonant without producing impossible consonant clusters. Lacking attested examples, we can only assume that connecting vowels would be fitted in by much
 the same rules as the ones that are seen to apply in the allative and ablative cases: -}{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033 - is used as a connecting vowel in the singular, whereas plural forms have -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 -. Hence presumably }{\b\lang1033 
elen}{\b\ul\lang1033 e}{\b\lang1033 ss\'eb}{\lang1033  "in a star", }{\b\lang1033 elen}{\b\ul\lang1033 i}{\b\lang1033 ssen}{\lang1033  "in stars". The dual "in a couple of stars" might prefer the connecting vowel -}{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033 - (?}{
\b\lang1033 elenets\'eb}{\lang1033 ). Contracted forms may also turn up, e.g. }{\b\lang1033 eless\'eb}{\lang1033  for }{\i\lang1033 elen-ss\'eb}{\lang1033 . The directions }{\b\lang1033 Formen}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 Hyarmen}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 
N\'famen}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 R\'f3men}{\lang1033  = North, South, West, East would almost certainly surrender their final -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  in the locative, just as they are seen to do in the allative and ablative cases. Hence probably }
{\b\lang1033 Formess\'eb}{\lang1033  "in the North", etc. }{\i\lang1033 F\'edriel's Song}{\lang1033  has }{\b\lang1033 N\'famessier}{\lang1033  for "they are in the west". This strange form seems to include the ending -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "is", pl. -}{\b\lang1033 ier}{\lang1033  "(they) are" which Tolkien probably dropped later. Even so, an underlying locative form }{\b\lang1033 N\'famess\'eb}{\lang1033  "in the West" must in any case be presupposed here. Since the noun }{\b\lang1033 N
\'famen}{\lang1033  "West" also appears in the shorter form }{\b\lang1033 N\'fam\'eb}{\lang1033 , we cannot be certain that a final -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  has dropped out here, but this locative form may be noted all the same.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Would nouns with dual forms in -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  also form their dual locatives in -}{\b\lang1033 ts\'eb}{\lang1033 
, or does this ending occur only where we are dealing with nouns that have nominative dual forms in -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 ? We may well wonder what the locative form of }{\b\lang1033 Aldu}{\lang1033  "Two Trees" would be. }{\b\lang1033 Alduss\'eb}{
\lang1033  with the simplest ending -}{\b\lang1033 ss\'eb}{\lang1033 , because duality is already sufficiently expressed by -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 ? }{\b\lang1033 Aldats\'eb}{\lang1033  formed from the uninflected form }{\b\lang1033 alda}{\lang1033 
? }{\b\lang1033 Alduts\'eb}{\lang1033  with double dual markers, -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  and -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 -? Personally I lean toward }{\b\lang1033 Alduss\'eb}{\lang1033 , but I would like to see a Tolkien-made example.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par The locative ending(s) can of course be combined with possessive pronominal endings just like the other case endings we have discussed. The Markirya poem has }{\b\lang1033 ringa s\'fama}{\b\cf2\lang1033 rya}{\b\cf6\lang1033 ss\'eb}{\lang1033  for "}{
\cf6\lang1033 in}{\lang1033  }{\cf2\lang1033 her}{\lang1033  cold bosom" (}{\b\lang1033 ringa}{\lang1033  "cold", }{\b\lang1033 s\'fama}{\lang1033  "bosom"; the reference is to the "bosom" of a ship).
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 RELATIVE SENTENCES}{\cf2\lang3081 
\par }{\lang1033 In LotR, there is one single example of a Quenya locative. The ending -}{\b\lang1033 ssen}{\lang1033  for plural locative occurs in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 , in the phrase }{\b\lang1033 Vardo tellumar..., ya}{\b\ul\lang1033 ssen
}{\b\lang1033  tintilar i eleni}{\lang1033  = "Varda's domes..., where}{\ul\lang1033 in}{\lang1033  [or, }{\ul\lang1033 in}{\lang1033  which] the stars twinkle..."
\par \tab The word }{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033  "which", here appearing with the locative ending -}{\b\lang1033 ssen}{\lang1033  to imply "in which", is a }{\i\lang1033 relative pronoun}{\lang1033 . It can be used to build }{\i\lang1033 relative sentences}{
\lang1033 , that is, sentences embedded in other sentences as a kind of descriptive phrases. Two sentences like "the treasure is great" and "you found it" can be combined as "the treasure }{\i\lang1033 which you found}{\lang1033 
 is great". Notice that the pronoun "it" of the sentence "you found it" is replaced by "which". 
This relative pronoun is capable of referring back to the words "the treasure", and "which I found" now becomes a descriptive phrase providing extra information about "the treasure". The probable Quenya equivalents of these examples:
\par 
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 I harma n\'e1 alta}{\lang1033  "the treasure is great"
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 + hirnelyes}{\lang1033  "you found it" 
\par \tab = }{\b\lang1033 i harma }{\b\ul\lang1033 ya}{\b\lang1033  hirnely\'eb n\'e1 alta}{\lang1033  "the treasure }{\ul\lang1033 which}{\lang1033  you found is great"
\par 
\par As a relative pronoun, English may also use "that" ("the treasure }{\ul\lang1033 that}{\lang1033  you found...")
\par \tab In German, the definite articles }{\i\lang1033 der}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 das}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 die}{\lang1033  (all = English "the", for various genders and numbers) are also used as relative pronouns. The Quenya article }{\b\lang1033 i
}{\lang1033  may likewise take on this function. This is evident from Cirion's Oath, the last words of which exemplify }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  used first as article, then as relative pronoun: ...}{\b\cf6\lang1033 i}{\b\lang1033  Eru }{\b\cf2\lang1033 
i}{\b\lang1033  or ily\'eb mahalmar \'eba tennoio}{\lang1033 , "}{\cf6\lang1033 the}{\lang1033  One }{\cf2\lang1033 who}{\lang1033 
 is above all thrones forever". Since "the One" (Eru, God) is a person and not a thing, the relative pronoun must here be translated "who" rather than "which". If there is any distinction in meaning between }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 ya
}{\lang1033  used as relative pronouns, this may indeed be it: }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  refers back to a person (English "who"), while }{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033 
 refers back to a thing or a situation (English "which"). Notice, by the way, that these glosses have nothing to do with the }{\i\lang1033 question-words}{\lang1033  "who" and "which": The word }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 
 cannot be used for "who" in a question, like "who are you?" The Quenya word for "who" in this sense is quite different (}{\b\lang1033 man}{\lang1033 ).
\par }{\fs20\lang1033 NOTE: This "who/which" distinction is not the only possible interpretation of our scarce examples. By another suggestion, }{\b\fs20\lang1033 i}{\fs20\lang1033  is used when the relative pronoun is the }{\i\fs20\lang1033 subject}{
\fs20\lang1033  of the relative sentence, while }{\b\fs20\lang1033 ya}{\fs20\lang1033  is used when it is the }{\i\fs20\lang1033 object}{\fs20\lang1033 : }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Elda }{\b\fs20\ul\lang1033 i}{\b\fs20\lang1033  tir\'eb Nauco}{\fs20\lang1033 
 "an Elf }{\fs20\ul\lang1033 who}{\fs20\lang1033  watches a Dwarf", but }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Elda }{\b\fs20\ul\lang1033 ya}{\b\fs20\lang1033  tir\'eb Nauco}{\fs20\lang1033  "an Elf }{\fs20\ul\lang1033 whom}{\fs20\lang1033  a Dwarf watches" (
English uses "whom" as the object form of the relative pronoun "who"). We need more examples before we can pick the right interpretation with confidence.
\par }{\lang1033 \tab The word }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  is in Quenya the "indeclinable article 'the'" (}{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 , entry }{\i\lang1033 I}{\lang1033 ). That is, }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  = "the" c
annot be declined; it cannot receive any case endings. We must assume that this is still true when }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  functions as a relative pronoun "who" instead. However, }{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033 
 is perfectly able to receive case endings, as indicated by the example }{\b\lang1033 yassen}{\lang1033  "in which" from }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 . The locative ending is plural because the relative pronoun refers back to a plural word, }{
\b\lang1033 tellumar}{\lang1033  "domes"; in the case of a single }{\b\lang1033 telluma}{\lang1033  or "dome", the relative pronoun referring back to it would likewise be singular: }{\b\lang1033 yass\'eb}{\lang1033 . Likewise with other nouns: }{
\b\lang1033 coa yass\'eb}{\lang1033  "a house in which...", but plural }{\b\lang1033 coar yassen}{\lang1033 ... "houses in which..."
\par \tab Besides the form }{\b\lang1033 yassen}{\lang1033  in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 , we have one more example of }{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033  occurring with a case ending. An early Elvish poem by Tolkien includes the words }{\b\lang1033 
tanya wende...}{\b\cf6\lang1033 yar}{\b\lang1033  i vilya anta miqilis}{\lang1033 , translated "that maiden...}{\cf6\lang1033 to whom}{\lang1033 
 the air gives kisses" (MC:215, 216). This is not quite LotR-style Quenya, so I don't regularize the spelling, but the form }{\b\lang1033 yar}{\lang1033  "to whom" is interesting. The final -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  here suffixed to }{\b\lang1033 ya}{
\lang1033  seems to be the old allative ending, as in }{\b\lang1033 mi}{\b\ul\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  "in}{\ul\lang1033 to}{\lang1033 "; hence }{\b\lang1033 ya}{\b\ul\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  = "whom-}{\ul\lang1033 to}{\lang1033 ", "to whom". The examples }{
\b\lang1033 yassen}{\lang1033  "in which" and }{\b\lang1033 yar}{\lang1033  "to whom" suggest that if you need a relative pronoun to receive case endings, such endings are always attached to }{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033 -. Even if }{\b\lang1033 ya}{
\lang1033  means "which" and }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  means "who" as we theorized above, a form like }{\b\lang1033 yassen}{\lang1033  may well cover both "in which" and "in whom" (since we can't have a distinct form **}{\b\lang1033 issen}{\lang1033 
 for the latter meaning if }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  is indeclinable). We must assume that }{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033  can receive all the various endings for number and case, being inflected like a noun in -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 
, as in these examples:
\par 
\par \tab \'a4 }{\lang3081 DATIVE: }{\b\lang3081 i n\'e9r }{\b\cf2\lang3081 ya}{\b\cf6\lang3081 n}{\b\lang3081  \'e1nen annanya}{\lang3081  "the man }{\b\cf6\lang3081 to}{\b\cf2\lang3081  whom}{\lang3081  I gave my gift", plural }{\b\lang3081 i neri }{
\b\cf2\lang3081 ya}{\b\cf6\lang3081 in}{\lang3081 ... "the men }{\b\cf6\lang3081 to}{\b\cf2\lang3081  whom}{\lang3081 ..." }{\i\lang3081 (The attested form }{\b\i\lang3081 yar}{\i\lang3081  "to whom", occurring in a con
text involving the verb "give", may evidently also take on dative-like functions \endash  but }{\b\i\lang3081 yar}{\i\lang3081  is properly an archaic allative, and generally I think }{\b\i\lang3081 yan}{\i\lang3081 , pl. }{\b\i\lang3081 yain}{
\i\lang3081 , is to be preferred.)}{\lang1033 
\par \tab \'a4 }{\lang3081 GENITIVE: }{\b\lang3081 i n\'eds }{\b\cf2\lang3081 y}{\b\cf6\lang3081 o}{\b\lang3081  yondo cennen}{\lang3081  "the woman whose [= }{\cf2\lang3081 who}{\lang3081 '}{\cf6\lang3081 s}{\lang3081 ] son I saw" }{\i\lang3081 (
we must assume that }{\b\i\lang3081 ya}{\i\lang3081  + the genitive ending -}{\b\i\lang3081 o}{\i\lang3081  would produce }{\b\i\lang3081 yo}{\i\lang3081 , a final -}{\b\i\lang3081 a}{\i\lang3081  being displaced as usual)}{\lang3081 , plural }{
\b\lang3081 i nissi }{\b\cf2\lang3081 ya}{\b\cf6\lang3081 ron}{\lang3081 ... "the women whose [= }{\cf2\lang3081 who}{\lang3081 '}{\cf6\lang3081 s}{\lang3081 ]..." }{\i\lang3081 (for a form like }{\b\i\lang3081 yaron}{\i\lang3081 , cf. }{\b\i\lang3081 
aldaron}{\i\lang3081  as the plural genitive of }{\b\i\lang3081 alda}{\i\lang3081  "tree")
\par }{\lang3081 \tab }{\lang1033 \'a4 }{\lang3081 POSSESSIVE: }{\b\lang3081 i aran }{\b\cf2\lang3081 ya}{\b\cf6\lang3081 va}{\b\lang3081  malta mapuvan}{\lang3081  "the king whose [= }{\cf2\lang3081 who}{\lang3081 '}{\cf6\lang3081 s}{\lang3081 
] gold I will seize", plural }{\b\lang3081 i arani }{\b\cf2\lang3081 ya}{\b\cf6\lang3081 iva}{\lang3081 ... "the kings whose [= }{\cf2\lang3081 who}{\lang3081 '}{\cf6\lang3081 s}{\lang3081 ]..."
\par \tab }{\lang1033 \'a4 }{\lang3081 ALLATIVE: }{\b\lang3081 i coa }{\b\cf2\lang3081 ya}{\b\cf6\lang3081 nna}{\b\lang3081  lenden}{\lang3081  "the house }{\b\cf6\lang3081 to }{\b\cf2\lang3081 which}{\lang3081 
 I went / the house whither I went / the house that I went to", plural }{\b\lang3081 i coar }{\b\cf2\lang3081 ya}{\b\cf6\lang3081 nnar}{\lang3081 ... "the houses }{\b\cf6\lang3081 to }{\b\cf2\lang3081 which}{\lang3081 ..."
\par }{\lang1033 \tab \'a4 }{\lang3081 ABLATIVE: }{\b\lang3081 i coa }{\b\cf2\lang3081 ya}{\b\cf6\lang3081 llo}{\b\lang3081  tullen}{\lang3081  "the house }{\b\cf6\lang3081 from }{\b\cf2\lang3081 which}{\lang3081 
 I came / the house whence I came / the house that I came from", plural }{\b\lang3081 i coar }{\b\cf2\lang3081 ya}{\b\cf6\lang3081 llon}{\lang3081  [alternatively, }{\b\cf2\lang3081 ya}{\b\cf6\lang3081 llor}{\lang3081 ]... "the houses }{\b\cf6\lang3081 
from }{\b\cf2\lang3081 which}{\lang3081 ..."
\par \tab }{\lang1033 \'a4 }{\lang3081 LOCATIVE: }{\b\lang3081 i coa }{\b\cf2\lang3081 ya}{\b\cf6\lang3081 ss\'eb}{\b\lang3081  marin}{\lang3081  "the house }{\b\cf6\lang3081 in }{\b\cf2\lang3081 which}{\lang3081 
 I live / the house that I live in / the house where I live", plural }{\b\lang3081 i coar }{\b\cf2\lang3081 ya}{\b\cf6\lang3081 ssen}{\lang3081 ... "the houses }{\b\cf6\lang3081 in }{\b\cf2\lang3081 which}{\lang3081 ..."
\par 
\par \tab In the nominative singular, the simple form }{\b\lang3081 ya}{\lang3081  is of course used: }{\b\lang3081 i parma }{\b\cf2\lang3081 ya}{\b\lang3081  et\'e9cien}{\lang3081 , "the book }{\cf2\lang3081 which}{\lang3081 
 I have written". It may be that this would become }{\b\lang3081 yar}{\lang3081  (with the plural ending -}{\b\lang3081 r}{\lang3081 ) when referring back to a plural word: }{\b\lang3081 i parmar yar}{\lang3081 
... "the books which..." (Distinguish the attested relative pronoun }{\b\lang3081 yar}{\lang3081  "to whom", MC:215, 216; this form includes the old allative ending -}{\b\lang3081 r}{\lang3081  instead.) Where }{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 
 is used as a relative pronoun, it receives no plural ending, since }{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081  is indeclinable: }{\b\lang3081 Eldar i lindar}{\lang3081  "Elves who sing".}{\i\lang3081 
\par }{\lang3081 \tab We have listed no }{\i\lang3081 dual}{\lang3081  forms, but they would presumably be quite regular: nominative }{\b\lang3081 yat}{\lang3081  (e.g. }{\b\lang3081 i peu yat}{\lang3081 ... "the [pair of] lips that..."), dative }{\b\lang3081 
yant}{\lang3081  (e.g. }{\b\lang3081 i veru yant}{\lang3081 ... "the [married] couple to/for whom..."), genitive }{\b\lang3081 yato}{\lang3081 , possessive }{\b\lang3081 yatwa}{\lang3081  (?), allative }{\b\lang3081 yanta}{\lang3081 , ablative }{
\b\lang3081 yalto}{\lang3081 , locative }{\b\lang3081 yats\'eb}{\lang3081  (e.g. }{\b\lang3081 i sambet yanta}{\lang3081 /}{\b\lang3081 yalto}{\lang3081 /}{\b\lang3081 yats\'eb}{\lang3081 ... "the two-room apartment to/from/in which...")
\par \tab It should be noted that in some grammatical contexts, a case ending that could have been added to }{\b\lang3081 ya}{\lang3081  may be omitted and understood. For instance, given that the word for "night" is }{\b\lang3081 l\'f3m\'eb}{\lang3081  (}{
\b\lang3081 l\'f3mi}{\lang3081 -), we could presumably have a sentence like }{\b\lang3081 l\'f3miss\'eb }{\b\ul\lang3081 yass\'eb}{\b\lang3081  cennenyes}{\lang3081  "in [the] night }{\ul\lang3081 in which}{\lang3081 
 I saw it" = "(in/on) the night when I saw it", but it is also permissible to let }{\b\lang3081 ya}{\lang3081  occur by itself: }{\b\lang3081 L\'f3miss\'eb }{\b\ul\lang3081 ya}{\b\lang3081  cennenyes}{\lang3081 
, a construction paralleling English "in [the] night }{\ul\lang3081 that}{\lang3081  I saw it" (very frequently, English would drop the initial "in", but in Quenya the locative ending should probably be included). 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 Notice that the article may be dropped before the first noun (}{\b\lang3081 l\'f3miss\'eb}{\lang3081  in our example); it is perhaps sufficiently determined by the following relative
 phrase. Tolkien employed such a construction in his Quenya translation of the Hail Mary (he paraphrased "in the hour of our death" as "in [the] hour that we shall die").}{\b\lang3081 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 
\par Usually, a relative pronoun refers back to a noun so that the following relative sentence provides information about that noun, as in all the examples above. Notice, however, the example }{\b\lang3081 i carir quettar}{\lang3081 
 "those who form words", quoted as a description of the Elves (WJ:391). }{\b\lang3081 I carir quettar}{\lang3081  by itself is a relative sentence, and we could certainly connect it with a noun and let the relative sentence refer back to it, e.g. }{
\b\ul\lang3081 Eldar}{\b\lang3081  i carir quettar}{\lang3081  "}{\ul\lang3081 Elves}{\lang3081  who form words". However, it appears that }{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081 
 can be put in front of a verb to express "the one who" (if the verb is singular) or "those who", "the ones who" (if the verb is plural, marked by the ending -}{\b\lang3081 r}{\lang3081 ). Cirion's Oath provides another example: }{\b\ul\lang1033 i h\'e1
rar}{\b\lang1033  mahalmassen mi N\'famen}{\lang1033  "}{\ul\lang1033 those who sit}{\lang1033  upon thrones in the West".}{\lang3081  We can probably feel free to build sentences like these:
\par 
\par \tab }{\b\lang3081 I lind\'eba n\'e1 n\'eds}{\lang3081  "[the one] who is singing is a woman"
\par \tab }{\b\lang3081 I hirner i malta nar aly\'eb}{\lang3081  "[the ones] who found the gold are rich"
\par \tab }{\b\lang3081 Hiruvan i suncer limpenya}{\lang3081  "I will find [the ones] who drank my wine" (singular ...}{\b\lang3081 i sunc\'eb limpenya}{\lang3081 , "[the one] who drank my wine")
\par }{\b\lang3081  }{\lang3081 
\par If }{\b\lang3081 ya}{\lang3081  can also be used in such constructions, and we are right to assume that }{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081  signifies "who" while }{\b\lang3081 ya}{\lang3081  means "which", there may be distinctions in meaning like }{\b\lang3081 
ec\'e9nien i t\'fala}{\lang3081  "I have seen [the one] who is coming" vs. }{\b\lang3081 ec\'e9nien ya t\'fala}{\lang3081  "I have seen what is coming" (litera
lly, "I have seen [that] which is coming"). The sentence "what I want is wine" would perhaps translate something like }{\b\lang3081 ya merin n\'e1 limp\'eb}{\lang3081  (i.e., "[that] which I want is wine").
\par 
\par }{\i\lang3081 Word order:}{\lang3081  Some languages employ a special word order in relative sentences. German insists on placing the verb last, so that we have constructions like "the man who there stands" (}{\i\lang3081 der Mann der dort steht}{
\lang3081 ) for "the man who stands there". For a while I wondered if Quenya employed a similar system; the verb }{\b\lang3081 \'eba}{\lang3081  "is, exists" appears near the end of the relative sentence concluding Cirion's Oath: }{\b\lang3081 i or ily
\'eb mahalmar }{\b\ul\lang3081 \'eba}{\b\lang3081  tennoio}{\lang3081 , literally "who over all thrones }{\ul\lang3081 is}{\lang3081 
 forever". However, as we see, the verb is not absolutely final; an entirely "German" word order would require "who over all thrones forever is".
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang3081 In }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081 , the verb actually follows immediately }{\i\lang3081 after}{\lang3081  the relative pronoun in the relative sentence }{\b\lang3081 yassen }{
\b\ul\lang3081 tintilar}{\b\lang3081  i eleni}{\lang3081  "wherein the stars }{\ul\lang3081 twinkle}{\lang3081 ", literally "in which }{\ul\lang3081 twinkle}{\lang3081  the stars". We might think that this is just a "poetic" wo
rd order, but Tolkien did not change it in the prose }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081  in RGEO:66-67. Does it make any difference that this is a relative pronoun with a case ending attached? Would it be }{\i\lang3081 wrong}{\lang3081  to say }{
\b\lang3081 yassen i eleni tintilar}{\lang3081 , with the subject of the verb preceding rather than following the verb? We cannot tell. Especially in the case of }{\b\lang3081 yasse}{\lang3081 (}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 ), }{\b\lang3081 yanna}{\lang3081 
(}{\b\lang3081 r}{\lang3081 ), }{\b\lang3081 yallo}{\lang3081 (}{\b\lang3081 n}{\lang3081 ) "in/to/from which", I would imitate our attested example and let the verb immediately follow the relative pronoun: }{\b\lang3081 I osto yass\'eb }{\b\ul\lang3081 
mar\'eb}{\b\lang3081  i n\'e9r}{\lang3081  "the city in which the man }{\ul\lang3081 dwells}{\lang3081 ", }{\b\lang3081 i tol yanna }{\b\ul\lang3081 c\'edrar}{\b\lang3081  i ciryar}{\lang3081  "the island whither the ships }{\ul\lang3081 are sailing}{
\lang3081 ", }{\b\lang3081 i n\'f3ri yallon }{\b\ul\lang3081 tulir}{\b\lang3081  i ohtari}{\lang3081  "the lands whence the warriors }{\ul\lang3081 come}{\lang3081 
". Otherwise, I will not try to make out any hard-and-fast rules for what word order Quenya relative sentences should have.}{\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 THIRD PERSON OBSCURITIES}{\lang1033 
\par Above we introduced the possessive pronominal ending -}{\b\lang1033 rya}{\lang1033 , covering "his" and "her". So what is the corresponding subject ending, meaning "he" and "she"?
\par \tab Since the ending -}{\b\lang1033 lya}{\lang1033  "your" is known to correspond to an ending -}{\b\lang1033 ly\'eb}{\lang1033  "you", many researchers, starting from -}{\b\lang1033 rya}{\lang1033  "her", have extrapolated an unattested suffix -}{
\b\lang1033 ry\'eb}{\lang1033  as the subject ending = "she". If, as indicated by }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 , the Quenya for "you will find" is }{\b\lang1033 hiruvaly\'eb}{\lang1033 , "she will find" would then be }{\b\lang1033 hiruvary\'eb}{
\lang1033 . Nancy Martsch uses this extrapolated ending -}{\b\lang1033 ry\'eb}{\lang1033  "she" throughout her }{\i\lang1033 Basic Quenya}{\lang1033  \endash  and it may well be correct. Now that it is known that -}{\b\lang1033 rya}{\lang1033  covers "
his" as well as "her", we would have to assume that -}{\b\lang1033 ry\'eb}{\lang1033  may similarly signify "he" as well as "she".
\par \tab The subject endings of the Third Person Singular \endash  the endings for "he", "she", and "it" \endash  however belong to one of the more obscure parts of the Quenya pronoun table. In material closely related to }{\i\lang1033 F\'edriel's Song}{
\lang1033 , one ending for "he" is seen to be -}{\b\lang1033 ro}{\lang1033 . It occurs in the form }{\b\lang1033 antav\'e1ro}{\lang1033  "he will give", attested in the question }{\b\lang1033 e man antav\'e1ro?}{\lang1033 
 "what will he give indeed?" (LR:63). }{\b\lang1033 Ant\'e1va}{\lang1033  as the simple future tense "will give" occurs on the same page (and in the full text of }{\i\lang1033 F\'edriel's Song}{\lang1033 
 as printed in LR:72). This may not be quite LotR-style Quenya; as we argued in Lesson Seven, the future tense of }{\b\lang1033 anta}{\lang1033 - should perhaps be }{\b\lang1033 antuva}{\lang1033  rather than }{\b\lang1033 ant\'e1va}{\lang1033 
 according to the system Tolkien decided upon later. Even so, the form }{\b\lang1033 antav\'e1ro}{\lang1033  nicely illustrates one apparent property of the ending -}{\b\lang1033 ro}{\lang1033 
: For some reason, the vowel immediately preceding this ending is }{\i\lang1033 lengthened}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ant\'e1v}{\b\ul\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  becoming }{\b\lang1033 antav}{\b\ul\lang1033 \'e1}{\b\lang1033 ro}{\lang1033  when -}{\b\lang1033 
ro}{\lang1033  is added (and the original long vowel of }{\b\lang1033 ant}{\b\ul\lang1033 \'e1}{\b\lang1033 va}{\lang1033  is }{\i\lang1033 shortened}{\lang1033  to avoid the form **}{\b\lang1033 ant\'e1v\'e1ro}{\lang1033 
: It may be that Quenya cannot have a long vowel in the syllable immediately preceding the vowel receiving the main accent except when this syllable is also the first syllable of the word). Should we update }{\b\lang1033 antav\'e1ro}{\lang1033 
 to something like }{\b\lang1033 antuv\'e1ro}{\lang1033  in LotR-style Quenya?
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 This ending -}{\b\lang1033 ro}{\lang1033  also turns up in a "Qenya" poem reproduced in MC:220, there added to a couple of verb forms including the past-tense ending -}{\b\lang1033 n\'eb}{
\lang1033 , and again the vowel preceding -}{\b\lang1033 ro}{\lang1033  is lengthened so that it receives the accent. One of them is }{\b\lang1033 laustan\'e9ro}{\lang1033 , which would seem to be a verb }{\b\lang1033 lausta}{\lang1033 
- "make a windy noise" (cf. MC:216) + the past tense ending -}{\b\lang1033 n\'eb}{\lang1033  + the ending -}{\b\lang1033 ro}{\lang1033  "he" (and "it"?) The whole phrase goes }{\b\lang1033 s\'faru laustan\'e9ro}{\lang1033 , translated 
"the wind rushed" (literally perhaps "[the] wind, he/it [-}{\b\lang1033 ro}{\lang1033 ] rushed"). Since this is "Qenya" rather than LotR-style Quenya, we shouldn't put too much emphasis on the details, but Tolkien does seem to be using an ending -}{
\b\lang1033 ro}{\lang1033 , that may mean "he" (but also "it"?), and that has the strange power of making the preceding vowel long. It has been suggested that the vowel rather }{\i\lang1033 remains}{\lang1033 
 long in this position because Tolkien imagined it to have been long in Primitive Elvish. If so, the vowel -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 - seen in the aorist of primary verbs (e.g. }{\b\lang1033 tul}{\b\ul\lang1033 i}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 
 "I come") should not be lengthened, since this vowel was never long (?}{\b\lang1033 tuliro}{\lang1033  rather than ?}{\b\lang1033 tul\'edro}{\lang1033  for "he comes").
\par Where would this ending -}{\b\lang1033 ro}{\lang1033  for "he" come from, and what is the ending for "she"? The entry }{\i\lang1033 S}{\lang1033 - in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 
 throws some light on what Tolkien imagined. Various Elvish words for "he, she, it" are there discussed. One primitive word for "he" is cited as }{\i\lang1033 s\'f4}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 so}{\lang1033 , "cf. -}{\i\lang1033 so}{\lang1033 
 inflection of verbs" \endash  apparently meaning that the primitive Elvish language might express "he" by means of an ending -}{\i\lang1033 so}{\lang1033  added to verbs. This -}{\i\lang1033 so}{\lang1033  could be the origin of the Quenya ending -}{
\b\lang1033 ro}{\lang1033 , for in Quenya, -}{\i\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 - occurring between vowels was normally voiced to -}{\b\lang1033 z}{\lang1033 -, which later became -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 - (the sound }{\b\lang1033 z}{\lang1033 
 merging with original }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 ). In the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 , Tolkien went on to cite one primitive word for "she" as }{\i\lang1033 s\'ee}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 si}{\lang1033 , "cf. -}{\i\lang1033 se}{\lang1033 
 inflexion of verbs". If -}{\i\lang1033 so}{\lang1033  produces -}{\b\lang1033 ro}{\lang1033  as a Quenya ending for "he", we would have to assume that -}{\i\lang1033 se}{\lang1033  similarly yields -}{\b\lang1033 r\'eb}{\lang1033  (earlier -}{
\b\lang1033 z\'eb}{\lang1033 ) as an ending for "she". This -}{\b\lang1033 r\'eb}{\lang1033  is possibly directly attested in the "Qenya" phrase }{\b\lang1033 kirya kalli\'e9}{\b\ul\lang1033 re}{\lang1033 , translated "the ship shone" (MC:220, 221) 
\endash  literally "[the] ship, she shone"? Turning the form }{\b\lang1033 kalli\'e9re}{\lang1033  into LotR-style Quenya would probably take more than just altering the spelling to }{\b\lang1033 calli\'e9r\'eb}{\lang1033 
, but it may be noted that the ending -}{\b\lang1033 r\'eb}{\lang1033 , like -}{\b\lang1033 ro}{\lang1033 , seems to prefer the company of a }{\i\lang1033 long}{\lang1033  vowel in the preceding syllable.
\par Many writers have used the endings -}{\b\lang1033 ro}{\lang1033  = "he" and -}{\b\lang1033 r\'eb}{\lang1033  = "she", so students of Quenya should certainly memorize them \endash 
 but as far or short as we know, they are only attested in material predating the writing of LotR. In 1994, there finally turned up a tiny scrap of evidence regarding Tolkien's post-LotR ideas about the pronominal ending for "he, she". In the essay }{
\i\lang1033 Quendi and Eldar}{\lang1033 , in the discussion of the tense-less verb }{\b\lang1033 equ\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "said, says", Tolkien noted that while this form normally does not receive endings of any kind, it may occur with certain pronominal endings. He cited two examples of this: }{\b\lang1033 equen}{\lang1033 , translated "said I", and also }{\b\lang1033 
eques}{\lang1033 , translated "said he / she" (WJ:414) or "said he, said someone" (WJ:392). So here we have an ending -}{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 
 that covers both "he" and "she" (or even "someone"). In the post-LotR period, Tolkien demonstrably used the ending -}{\b\lang1033 rya}{\lang1033  for
 both "his" and "her", so it is not surprising that he might have decided that Quenya used one ending for both "he" and "she" as well (cf. also the Finnish gender-neutral pronoun }{\i\lang1033 h\'e4n}{\lang1033 .) Actually this ending -}{\b\lang1033 s}{
\lang1033  must also cover "it", for it can hardly be kept apart from the ending -}{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  that we have already met in object position \endash  as in }{\b\lang1033 tiruvante}{\b\ul\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  "they will keep }{\ul\lang1033 
it}{\lang1033 " (}{\i\lang1033 Cirion's Oath}{\lang1033 ) or }{\b\lang1033 caritalya}{\b\ul\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  "your doing }{\ul\lang1033 it}{\lang1033 " (VT41:17). So }{\b\lang1033 eques}{\lang1033  could probably mean "it said" jus
t as well as "(s)he said". Conversely, -}{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  may probably refer to }{\i\lang1033 people}{\lang1033  in object position as well: Perhaps }{\b\lang1033 tiruvante}{\b\ul\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 
 might also mean "they will keep [or, watch] }{\ul\lang1033 him}{\lang1033 /}{\ul\lang1033 her}{\lang1033 ".
\par A form like }{\b\lang1033 tulis}{\lang1033  would have to be translated either "he comes", "she comes", or "it comes" depending on the context. The existence of such an ending does not necessarily contradict the references Tolkien made to primitive "-}{
\i\lang1033 so}{\lang1033  inflexion" and "-}{\i\lang1033 se}{\lang1033  inflexion" of verbs in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 : Normally, the final short -}{\i\lang1033 o}{\lang1033  and -}{\i\lang1033 e}{\lang1033  of primitive Elv
ish have been lost in Quenya, so primitive forms like }{\i\lang1033 tuli-so}{\lang1033  "he comes" and }{\i\lang1033 tuli-se}{\lang1033  "she comes" might well merge as }{\b\lang1033 tulis}{\lang1033 
 "(s)he comes". Where this would leave the longer, gender-specific endings -}{\b\lang1033 ro}{\lang1033  and -}{\b\lang1033 r\'eb}{\lang1033  found in early material is unclear. Tolkien may
 have meant them to descend from variant endings with long vowels (-}{\i\lang1033 s\'f4}{\lang1033  and -}{\i\lang1033 s\'ea}{\lang1033 ), final -}{\i\lang1033 \'f4}{\lang1033  and -}{\i\lang1033 \'ea}{\lang1033  becoming -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033 
 and -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  in Quenya. Perhaps the gender-specific endings would be used where the short, general 3rd person ending -}{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  "he, she, it" is not specific eno
ugh? But there is every reason to believe that Tolkien repeatedly changed his mind about the details; we can't even rule out the possibility that the long endings -}{\b\lang1033 ro}{\lang1033  "he" and -}{\b\lang1033 r\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "she" were dropped altogether.
\par Anyhow, if -}{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  is to be the ending for "(s)he", where does this leave the unattested ending -}{\b\lang1033 ry\'eb}{\lang1033  that some students have (plausibly) extrapolated from the possessive ending -}{\b\lang1033 rya}{
\lang1033  "his, her"? The ending -}{\b\lang1033 ry\'eb}{\lang1033  may still be valid. Perhaps the ending for "(s)he" alternates between -}{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  and -}{\b\lang1033 ry\'eb}{\lang1033  just like the 
ending for "I" may appear as either -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 ny\'eb}{\lang1033 . (While the endings -}{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  and -}{\b\lang1033 ry\'eb}{\lang1033  may seem less similar than -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  vs. -}{
\b\lang1033 ny\'eb}{\lang1033 , it should be understood that -}{\b\lang1033 ry\'eb}{\lang1033  would come from earlier -}{\i\lang1033 sye}{\lang1033 : Following a vowel, the combination }{\i\lang1033 sy}{\lang1033  turns into }{\b\lang1033 zy}{\lang1033 
 and then }{\b\lang1033 ry}{\lang1033 . Cf. the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 , entry }{\i\lang1033 SUS}{\lang1033 ; from this root, Tolkien derived the Quenya word }{\b\lang1033 surya}{\lang1033 
 "spirant consonant", which must be understood to come from }{\i\lang1033 susy\'e2}{\lang1033  in the primitive language.) The longer ending -}{\b\lang1033 ry\'eb}{\lang1033  would be used primarily when a second pronominal ending denoting the }{
\i\lang1033 object}{\lang1033  is to be added, e.g., }{\b\lang1033 tiri}{\b\cf6\lang1033 rye}{\b\cf2\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  "}{\cf6\lang1033 (s)he }{\lang1033 watches }{\cf2\lang1033 them}{\lang1033 " \endash 
 whereas "(s)he watches" by itself could be either }{\b\lang1033 tiris}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 tiriry\'eb}{\lang1033 , but more commonly the former. But writers who want to avoid the unattested ending -}{\b\lang1033 ry\'eb}{\lang1033 
 may opt for the gender-specific endings -}{\b\lang1033 ro}{\lang1033  and -}{\b\lang1033 r\'eb}{\lang1033  instead, to bring in a connecting vowel: }{\b\lang1033 tiri}{\b\cf6\lang1033 ro}{\b\cf2\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  "}{\cf6\lang1033 he }{\lang1033 
watches }{\cf2\lang1033 them}{\lang1033 ", }{\b\lang1033 tiri}{\b\cf6\lang1033 re}{\b\cf2\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  "}{\cf6\lang1033 she }{\lang1033 watches }{\cf2\lang1033 them}{\lang1033 ". 
\par In the exercises below, we will however avoid all speculative endings and constructions and concentrate on the only known facts we have at o
ur disposal regarding the 3rd person singular of the pronoun table: In Quenya as Tolkien had come to see this language in the post-LotR period, the ending -}{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  may be used for "he, she, it", whereas -}{\b\lang1033 rya}{\lang1033 
 covers "his" and "her". (We may plausibly assume that -}{\b\lang1033 rya}{\lang1033  covers "its" as well: Notice that in the phrase }{\b\lang1033 ringa s\'fama}{\b\ul\lang1033 rya}{\b\lang1033 ss\'eb}{\lang1033  "in }{\ul\lang1033 her}{\lang1033 
 cold bosom" cited above, the reference is actually to a ship, so "its bosom" would seem to be an equally appropriate translation.) The long endings -}{\b\lang1033 ro}{\lang1033  and -}{\b\lang1033 r\'eb}{\lang1033  are not used in th
e exercises or the keys, since their status in LotR-style Quenya is slightly uncertain (not that I necessarily discourage writers from using them).
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\i\cf2\lang3081 Summary of Lesson Fifteen:}{\lang3081  The Quenya pronominal possessive ending for "his, her" is -}{\b\lang3081 rya}{\lang3081 , behaving like the other endings of this kind (endings for number or case may be added after it). If a }{
\i\lang3081 dual}{\lang3081  noun is to receive a pronominal ending, its duality is indicated by -}{\b\lang3081 t}{\lang3081  added to this ending (cf. }{\b\lang3081 m\'e1ryat}{\lang3081  "her [pair of] hands" in }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081 
), apparently even in the case of nouns that would otherwise receive the alternative dual marker -}{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081  instead. \endash  The extended infinitives in -}{\b\lang3081 ta}{\lang3081  which may receive pronominal endings denoting the }{
\i\lang3081 object}{\lang3081  (e.g. }{\b\lang3081 carita}{\b\ul\lang3081 s}{\lang3081  "to do }{\ul\lang3081 it}{\lang3081 ") may also receive possessive pronominal endings denoting the }{\i\lang3081 subject}{\lang3081 , e.g. }{\b\lang3081 carita}{
\b\ul\lang3081 lya}{\lang3081 (}{\b\lang3081 s}{\lang3081 ) "}{\ul\lang3081 your}{\lang3081  doing (it)". \endash  Nouns ending in a long vowel, e.g. }{\b\lang3081 m\'e1}{\lang3081 
 "hand", would shorten this vowel before a consonant cluster; thus the plural allative is attested as }{\b\lang3081 mannar}{\lang3081  (for the impossible form **}{\b\lang3081 m\'e1nnar}{\lang3081 ). Curiously, long vowels are }{\i\lang3081 not}{
\lang3081  shortened before }{\b\lang3081 ry}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 ly}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 ny}{\lang3081 , }{\b\lang3081 ty}{\lang3081 , though these combinations do count as consonant clusters for the purpose of stress. \endash  The Quenya }{
\i\lang3081 locative}{\lang3081  case has the ending -}{\b\lang3081 ss\'eb}{\lang3081 , plural -}{\b\lang3081 ssen}{\lang3081 , and dual -}{\b\lang3081 ts\'eb}{\lang3081  (at least in the case of nouns with nominative dual forms in -}{\b\lang3081 t}{
\lang3081 ; nouns with nominative dual forms in -}{\b\lang3081 u}{\lang3081  may simply add -}{\b\lang3081 ss\'eb}{\lang3081 ). These endings express the idea of "in", "on", "upon", e.g. }{\b\lang3081 cirya}{\b\ul\lang3081 ss\'eb}{\lang3081  "}{
\ul\lang3081 (up)on}{\lang3081  a ship", }{\b\lang3081 coa}{\b\ul\lang3081 ssen}{\lang3081  "}{\ul\lang3081 in}{\lang3081  houses". \endash  Quenya }{\i\lang3081 relative sentences}{\lang3081  may be formed using the relative pronoun }{\b\lang3081 ya}{
\lang3081  "which, that". }{\b\lang3081 Ya}{\lang3081  may also receive endings for case and number, cf. the plural locative }{\b\lang3081 yassen}{\lang3081  "in which" or "wherein" occurring in }{\i\lang3081 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang3081 
 (plural because it refers back to a plural word). The article }{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081  "the" may also be used as a relative pronoun, cf. }{\b\cf6\lang1033 i}{\b\lang1033  Eru }{\b\cf2\lang1033 i}{\b\lang1033  or ily\'eb mahalmar \'eba tennoio}{
\lang1033 , "}{\cf6\lang1033 the}{\lang1033  One }{\cf2\lang1033 who}{\lang1033  is above all thrones" in }{\i\lang1033 Cirion's Oath}{\lang1033 , but }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  apparently cannot receive endings for case or number. In front of a verb, }{
\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  can be used by itself to express "the one(s) who do(es)" whatever the verb expresses, e.g., }{\b\lang1033 i carir quettar}{\lang1033  "the ones/those who form words". \endash  }{\lang3081 
The pronominal endings for "he" and "she" are somewhat uncertain. Early material contains verbs with the endings -}{\b\lang3081 ro}{\lang3081  "he" and -}{\b\lang3081 r\'eb}{\lang3081  "she" (often combined with lengthening of the vow
el of the preceding syllable). In post-LotR material, we have one attestation of -}{\b\lang3081 s}{\lang3081 
 as an ending covering both "he" and "she", and since the same ending is attested with the meaning "it" elsewhere (as object), we may assume that -}{\b\lang3081 s}{\lang3081  is a general ending cove
ring the entire 3rd person singular, as subject or object. One educated guess has it that this -}{\b\lang3081 s}{\lang3081  alternates with a longer form -}{\b\lang3081 ry\'eb}{\lang3081  (plausibly extrapolated from the possessive ending -}{\b\lang3081 
rya}{\lang3081  "his/her"), but only the attested ending -}{\b\lang3081 s}{\lang3081  is used in the exercises below.
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 VOCABULARY}{\lang3081 
\par 
\par }{\b\lang3081 tatya}{\lang3081  "second" }{\fs20\lang3081 (The original name of the Second Clan of the Elves was }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Tatyar}{\fs20\lang3081 , literally "Seconds, Second Ones", though the Eldarin branch of that clan would later be called }{
\b\fs20\lang3081 Noldor}{\fs20\lang3081  instead [WJ:380-381]. A variant form of }{\b\fs20\lang3081 tatya}{\fs20\lang3081  is }{\b\fs20\lang3081 atya}{\fs20\lang3081  [attested, compounded, in VT41:10], which connects more clearly with the basic number }{
\b\fs20\lang3081 atta}{\fs20\lang3081  "two". As will be explained in Lesson 17, "second" was later expressed as }{\b\fs20\lang3081 att\'eba}{\fs20\lang3081 , but students should know the archaic form }{\b\fs20\lang3081 tatya}{\fs20\lang3081 
 as well, and we will use this form here.)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 mar}{\lang3081 - "to dwell, abide"; to "live" somewhere in the sense of dwelling there }{\fs20\lang3081 (cf. Elendil's Declaration: }{\b\fs20\lang3081 sinom\'eb maruvan}{\fs20\lang3081  = "in this place will I abide")}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 ya}{\lang3081  relative pronoun "that, which", often with case endings; as relative pronoun alternating with }{\b\lang3081 i}{\lang3081  (= "who", referring to people and used when no ending for case or number is to be added?)
\par }{\b\lang3081 aur\'eb}{\lang3081  "day" }{\fs20\lang3081 (the actual daylight period, not a full 24-hour cycle)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 veru}{\lang3081  "(married) couple, man and wife, pair of spouses" }{\fs20\lang3081 (an old dual form apparently lacking any singular; there are only the gender-specific words }{\b\fs20\lang3081 verno}{\fs20\lang3081  "husband" and }{
\b\fs20\lang3081 vess\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081  "wife" from the same root)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 m\'e1}{\lang3081  "hand"
\par }{\b\lang3081 p\'e9}{\lang3081  "lip", nominative dual }{\b\lang3081 peu}{\lang3081  }{\fs20\lang3081 (so according to VT39:9, reproducing a post-LotR source. Earlier, in the entry }{\i\fs20\lang3081 PEG}{\fs20\lang3081  of the }{\i\fs20\lang3081 
Etymologies}{\fs20\lang3081 , the word }{\b\fs20\lang3081 p\'e9}{\fs20\lang3081  had been glossed "mouth" instead \endash  which would be pure plagiarism of the }{\i\fs20\lang3081 Hebrew}{\fs20\lang3081 
 word for "mouth"! But Tolkien apparently thought better of it: in LotR Appendix E, the Quenya word for "mouth" is given as }{\b\fs20\lang3081 anto}{\fs20\lang3081  instead, which word we introduced in Lesson Eleven.)  }{
\par }{\b\lang3081 mall\'eb}{\lang3081  "road, street" }{\fs20\lang3081 (nominative pl. }{\b\fs20\lang3081 maller}{\fs20\lang3081 , LR:47, 56; SD:310 \endash  as we theorized in Lesson Two, nouns in -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 l\'eb}{\fs20\lang3081 
 may regularly have plural forms in -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 ler}{\fs20\lang3081  rather than -}{\b\fs20\lang3081 li}{\fs20\lang3081 .)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 hr\'edv\'eb}{\lang3081  "winter"
\par }{\b\lang3081 apa}{\lang3081  preposition "after" }{\fs20\lang3081 (only attested compounded; cf. }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Apan\'f3nar}{\fs20\lang3081  "the Afterborn" as an Elvish name of Men, the Elves themselves being the Firstborn \endash  see the }{
\i\fs20\lang3081 Silmarillion}{\fs20\lang3081 , near the beginning of chapter 12. We will here assume that }{\b\fs20\lang3081 apa}{\fs20\lang3081  may also function as an independent preposition.)}{\lang3081 
\par }{\b\lang3081 Hyarmen}{\lang3081  "the South"
\par }{\b\lang3081 hyarya}{\lang3081  adjective "left"
\par 
\par }{\fs20\lang3081 NOTE: As suggested by their shapes, the words for "south" and "left" are closely related. As explained by Tolkien in LotR Appendix E, the four directions }{\b\fs20\lang3081 N\'famen}{\fs20\lang3081 , }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Hyarmen}{
\fs20\lang3081 , }{\b\fs20\lang3081 R\'f3men}{\fs20\lang3081 , }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Formen}{\fs20\lang3081  = West, South, East, North were normally listed in that order, "beginning with and facing west" \endash 
 apparently because that was the direction of the Blessed Realm. It may be no coincidence that the directions are listed counterclockwise so that the North is named last, for in the First Age when this convention was presuma
bly established, North was the direction of Morgoth's stronghold (Angband or Thangorodrim). Our imaginary speaker facing the West would have the South on his left hand, and Tolkien explained that }{\b\fs20\lang3081 Hyarmen}{\fs20\lang3081 
 means basically "left-hand region". As Tolkien also 
noted, this system is "the opposite to the arrangement in many Mannish languages", which tend rather to use the East (the direction of the sunrise) as the starting-point "faced" by the speaker. Thus the words for "south" and "right" may be associated or i
dentical \endash  cf. for instance Hebrew }{\i\fs20\lang3081 yam\'een}{\fs20\lang3081 .}{\lang3081 
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 EXERCISES
\par }{\lang3081 
\par 1. Translate into English (the pronominal ending -}{\b\lang3081 s}{\lang3081  may have various English equivalents):
\par 
\par }{\i\lang3081 A}{\lang3081 . }{\b\lang3081 Tuluvas i tatya auress\'eb.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 B.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 I hr\'edvess\'eb rimb\'eb aiwi autar marien Hyarmess\'eb; apa i hr\'edv\'eb autant\'eb Hyarmello ar tulir n\'f3relmanna. }{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 C.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Hiritarya malta i orontissen \'e1n\'eb alass\'eb lieryan, an hiritaryas carn\'eb lierya alya.}{\i\lang3081 
\par D.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Tatya hr\'edvess\'eb ya marnes i coass\'eb hirnes harma nu i talan.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 E.}{\b\lang3081  Quetis lambelma, an maris n\'f3relmass\'eb.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 F.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 Eques: "Cennen macil i ohtaro hyarya mass\'eb."
\par }{\i\lang3081 G. }{\b\lang3081 I n\'e9r i hirn\'eb i harma nurtuva i engwi yar ih\'edries samberyats\'eb.}{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 H.}{\lang3081  }{\b\lang3081 I amboss\'eb cenis i veru yat it\'edries coaryallo, ar yant \'e1nes annarya.}{\lang3081 
\par 
\par 2. Translate into Quenya:
\par 
\par }{\i\lang3081 I.}{\lang3081  She saw a couple in the street.
\par }{\i\lang3081 J.}{\lang3081  I found the woman who lives in the house between the rivers, and I watched her lips }{\i\lang3081 (dual)}{\lang3081  and her hands }{\i\lang3081 (dual)}{\lang3081 ; in her left hand I saw a book.
\par }{\i\lang3081 K.}{\lang3081  I saw his cup in his hands }{\i\lang3081 (dual)}{\lang3081 , the cup from which he poured wine into his mouth.}{\b\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 L}{\lang3081 . The ones who dwell in the towers to which the man is going are warriors. }{\b\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 M.}{\lang3081  His drinking the wine was not a good idea, for what he did after his drinking it was not wise. }{\i\fs20\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang3081 N}{\lang3081 . After we }{\i\lang3081 (excl.)}{\lang3081  went away [pa.t. of }{\b\lang3081 auta}{\lang3081 -] from our }{\i\lang3081 (excl.)}{\lang3081  land in the South, we have seen many Dwarves on the roads.
\par }{\i\lang3081 O.}{\lang3081  The towers on the hills are great; the one who owns [}{\b\lang3081 harya}{\lang3081  = possesses] the greatest tower, from which one [}{\b\lang3081 quen}{\lang3081 ] can see the Elven-land [}{\b\lang3081 Eldan\'f3r\'eb}{
\lang3081 ], is the richest man in the city.
\par }{\i\lang3081 P}{\lang3081 . A people whose king is wise will dwell in peace in a good land which they will love deeply. }{\lang1033 
\par }{\lang3081 
\par }{\i\lang1033 Further Lessons may be downloaded from this URL:}{\lang1033 
\par http://www.uib.no/People/hnohf/less-d.rtf}{\lang3081 
\par }}