{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff0\deflang1033\deflangfe1044{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f2\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 02070309020205020404}Courier New;}{\f3\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05050102010706020507}Symbol;}{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Times;}
{\f5\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Helvetica;}{\f6\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Courier;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Geneva;}
{\f8\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Tms Rmn;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Helv;}{\f10\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Serif;}
{\f11\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Sans Serif;}{\f12\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}New York;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}System;}
{\f14\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05000000000000000000}Wingdings;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604030504040204}Tahoma;}{\f16\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Marlett;}
{\f17\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Reference 1;}{\f18\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Reference 2;}{\f19\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05020603050405020304}Times New Roman Special G1;}
{\f20\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05020603050405020304}Times New Roman Special G2;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0506020202030204}Arial Narrow;}{\f22\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0a04020102020204}Arial Black;}
{\f23\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020404030301010803}Garamond;}{\f24\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02050604050505020204}Bookman Old Style;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0806030902050204}Impact;}
{\f26\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 050b0604020202020204}Arial Special G1;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 050b0604020202020204}Arial Special G2;}{\f28\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 050b0506020202030204}Arial Narrow Special G1;}
{\f29\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 050b0506020202030204}Arial Narrow Special G2;}{\f30\fscript\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 030f0702030302020204}Comic Sans MS;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604030504040204}Verdana;}
{\f32\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Angerthas;}{\f33\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Angerthas Moria;}{\f34\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0500000000000000}Tengwar Quenya;}
{\f35\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0500000000000000}Tengwar Sindarin;}{\f36\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0500000000000000}AngloSaxon Runes;}{\f37\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000400000000000000}Tengwar Parmaite;}
{\f38\froman\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}.;}{\f39\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}GillSans;}{\f40\fnil\fcharset0\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Arial Rounded MT Bold;}
{\f131\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Tahoma CE;}{\f132\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Tahoma Cyr;}{\f134\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Tahoma Greek;}{\f135\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Tahoma Tur;}{\f136\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Tahoma Baltic;}
{\f167\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial Narrow CE;}{\f168\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Narrow Cyr;}{\f170\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Narrow Greek;}{\f171\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Narrow Tur;}{\f172\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Narrow Baltic;}
{\f173\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial Black CE;}{\f174\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Black Cyr;}{\f176\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Black Greek;}{\f177\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Black Tur;}{\f178\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Black Baltic;}
{\f179\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Garamond CE;}{\f180\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Garamond Cyr;}{\f182\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Garamond Greek;}{\f183\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Garamond Tur;}{\f184\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Garamond Baltic;}
{\f185\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Bookman Old Style CE;}{\f186\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Bookman Old Style Cyr;}{\f188\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Bookman Old Style Greek;}{\f189\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Bookman Old Style Tur;}
{\f190\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Bookman Old Style Baltic;}{\f191\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Impact CE;}{\f192\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Impact Cyr;}{\f194\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Impact Greek;}{\f195\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Impact Tur;}
{\f196\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Impact Baltic;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid 
\snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\info{\title LESSON ONE}{\author Helge K\'e5re Fauskanger}{\operator Helge K\'e5re Fauskanger}{\creatim\yr2002\mo9\dy15\hr17\min48}{\revtim\yr2002\mo9\dy17\hr17\min12}{\version5}{\edmins312}
{\nofpages60}{\nofwords25550}{\nofchars145635}{\*\company  }{\nofcharsws178850}{\vern73}}\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl1417\margr1417\margt1417\margb1417 
\deftab708\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphhotz425\hyphcaps0\formshade\viewkind4\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot \fet0\sectd \linex0\headery709\footery709\colsx709\endnhere\sectdefaultcl {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9
\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid {\b\fs36\cf6\lang1033 LESSON ONE
\par }{\b\fs32\lang1033 The sounds of Quenya.
\par Pronunciation and accentuation.
\par }{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang1033 GENERAL REMARKS
\par }{\lang1033 Quenya as an actual entity in our own world exists primarily as a }{\i\lang1033 written}{\lang1033  language: Quenya enthusiasts tend to be widely scattered and must generally share their compositions
 via some written medium only (indeed I shall normally refer to users of Quenya as "writers" rather than "speakers"). Nonetheless, any student should obviously know what pronunciation Tolkien imagined, as well as his intentions can be approximated now.

\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 There exist a very few recordings of Tolkien himself reading Quenya texts. In a late TV interview, Tolkien writes out and pronounces the greeting}{\b\lang1033  elen s\'edla l\'famenn' omentielvo}{
\lang1033 . More notably, he made two different recordings of }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  (sung and spoken). The }{\cf1\lang1033 spoken version is also available on the net: }{\cf1\lang1033\cgrid0 
http://www.salon.com/audio/2000/10/05/tolkien_elvish/index.html}{\cf1\lang1033  (under "Poem in Elvish"). A few lines of this version of }{\i\cf1\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  differ from their LotR counterparts: The recorded version has }{
\b\lang1033 inyar \'fan\'f3ti nar ve r\'e1mar aldaron}{\lang1033  / }{\b\lang1033 inyar ve lint\'eb yulmar v\'e1nier}{\lang1033  instead of }{\b\lang1033 y\'e9ni \'fan\'f3tim\'eb ve r\'e1mar aldaron!}{\lang1033  / }{\b\lang1033 y\'e9ni ve lint\'eb yuldar 
}{\lang1033 (}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 )}{\b\lang1033 v\'e1nier}{\lang1033  as in LotR. The recording was made before the book was published (and hence before the final revisions). A much later recording, with the s
ame text as in the book, also exists. I have not heard it, so I cannot comment further.
\par The very few extant recordings are interesting, but they are not our chief source of information. Most of what we know about Quenya pronunciation is based on Tolkien's written }{\i\lang1033 notes}{\lang1033 
 about how his languages should be pronounced, predominantly the information provided in LotR Appendix E. (Indeed Tolkien's actual pronunciation in the recordings is not always quite flawless according to his own technical descriptions, but th
en he was not a native speaker of Quenya.)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par Any natural language has a }{\i\lang1033 phonology}{\lang1033 , a set of rules defining what sounds are used, how they vary and behave, and how they can be combined. This goes for any well-made invented language as well. Quenya is most de
finitely not a haphazard jumble of sounds; Tolkien carefully constructed its phonology \endash 
 both as an evolving entity (classical Quenya gradually developing from Primitive Elvish) and as a "fixed" form (defining the kind of Quenya that was used as a language
 of lore and ceremony in Middle-earth). Tolkien had Pengolodh, the sage of Gondolin, observe that Elvish tongues tended to use relatively few sounds \endash 
 "for the Eldar being skilled in craft are not wasteful nor prodigal to small purpose, admiring in a tongu
e rather the skilled and harmonious use of a few well-balanced sounds than profusion ill-ordered" (PM:398). None of the sounds used in Quenya are particularly exotic from a European viewpoint, but they are combined in an exquisitely tidy manner. Compared 
to Tolkien's Elvish, many "real" languages indeed appear rather messy.
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang1033 BASIC TERMS
\par }{\lang1033 Let us get some basic terms into place (people with linguistic training need not spend much time on this section). The sounds of any language can be divided into two broad categories, }{\i\lang1033 vowels}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 
consonants}{\lang1033 . The }{\i\lang1033 vowels}{\lang1033 
 are sounds made by letting the air stream "freely" through the mouth: Different vowels are produced by modifying the position of the tongue and the lips, but the stream of air is not directly obstructed. If one draws out various vowels, pronouncing }{
\b\lang1033 aaaaa}{\lang1033 ... or }{\b\lang1033 eeeee}{\lang1033 ... or }{\b\lang1033 ooooo}{\lang1033 
...,  it is easy to feel how the air streams quite unhindered though the mouth: One merely configures the tongue and lips to "shape" the desired sound. Vowels can be more or less "open" or 
"closed": You only have to notice the position of the tongue and lower jaw when pronouncing }{\b\lang1033 aaah}{\lang1033 ... as contrasted with their position when you pronounce }{\b\lang1033 ooooh}{\lang1033 
... to understand what is meant by this. The vowel }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  (as in English }{\i\lang1033 p}{\b\i\lang1033 a}{\i\lang1033 rt}{\lang1033 ) is the most open, while the vowel }{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  (as in English }{\i\lang1033 r}{
\b\i\lang1033 u}{\i\lang1033 de}{\lang1033 ) is the most closed. Other vowels fall between. Vowels can also be more or less "rounded", mainly depending on the position of the lips; the vowel }{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 
 (as just described) is said to be rounded because it is pronounced with the lips pouted. A vowel like }{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033  (as in English }{\i\lang1033 s}{\b\i\lang1033 o}{\i\lang1033 re}{\lang1033 ) is actually pronounced much like the }{
\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  of }{\i\lang1033 p}{\b\i\lang1033 a}{\i\lang1033 rt}{\lang1033 , but }{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033  is rounded and }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  is not \endash  making the vowels audibly distinct.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 When pronouncing vowels, the stream of air is only }{\i\lang1033 modified}{\lang1033  (by means of devices like the ones just described). It is never actually "hindered". In the case of the }{
\i\lang1033 consonants}{\lang1033 , the air is however more actively obstructed. Thus, Tolkien can inform us that one early Elvish term for consonant was }{\b\lang1033 tapta tengw\'eb}{\lang1033  or just }{\b\lang1033 tapta}{\lang1033 
, meaning "impeded element" or "impeded one" (VT39:7). In the most "extreme" cases the stream of air may even be completely halted for a moment: This is easily perceived in the case of a consonant like }{\b\lang1033 p}{\lang1033 
, which is pronounced by bringing the lips into contact, momentarily cutting off the stream of air from the lungs and allowing a pressure to build up inside the mouth. Then the lips are suddenly parted again, releasing the air in a small explosion 
\endash  and this explosion constitutes a }{\b\lang1033 p}{\lang1033 . Such }{\i\lang1033 plosive}{\lang1033  consonants include }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 p}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033  and their counterparts }{\b\lang1033 d}{
\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 b}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 g}{\lang1033  (sc. hard }{\b\lang1033 g}{\lang1033  as in }{\i\lang1033 gold}{\lang1033 , not as in }{\i\lang1033 gin}{\lang1033 
). They are all formed by halting and then suddenly releasing the air various places in the mouth. Instead of halting the air completely one may also let it "fizzle through" a small opening, as when }{\b\lang1033 f}{\lang1033 
 is pronounced by forcing the air out between the lower lip and the upper teeth; such "friction" sounds are called }{\i\lang1033 fricatives}{\lang1033  (or }{\i\lang1033 spirants}{\lang1033 ) and include consonants like }{\b\lang1033 f}{\lang1033 , }{
\b\lang1033 th}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 v}{\lang1033 . And there are yet other options on how to manipulate the stream of air, such as rerouting it through the nose to produce }{\i\lang1033 nasal}{\lang1033  consonants like }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 
 or }{\b\lang1033 m}{\lang1033 . 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab The concept of }{\i\lang1033 voicing}{\lang1033  should also be understood. Humans (and, it would seem, Elves) come with a kind of buzzing device installed in their throats, namely the }{
\i\lang1033 vocal chords}{\lang1033 . By making the vocal chords vibrate, one may add "voice" to the stream of air before it enters the speech organs proper. The presence or lack of such voicing is what distinguishes sounds like }{\b\lang1033 v}{
\lang1033  vs. }{\b\lang1033 f}{\lang1033 . If one draws out a sound like }{\b\lang1033 ffff}{\lang1033 ...and suddenly turns it into }{\b\lang1033 vvvv}{\lang1033 
... instead, one will feel the "buzzer" in the throat kicking in (put a finger on your glottis \endash  what in men is called the "Adam's apple", less protuberant in women \endash 
 and you will actually feel the vibration of the vocal chords). In principle, the device of voicing could be used to double the number of sounds we are able to produce, since they could all be pronounced either }{\i\lang1033 with}{\lang1033 
 vibration in the vocal chords (as }{\i\lang1033 voiced}{\lang1033  sounds) or }{\i\lang1033 without}{\lang1033  such vibration (as }{\i\lang1033 unvoiced}{\lang1033  sounds). In practice, most of the s
ounds of speech do not appear in unvoiced versions. Many sounds would barely be perceptible without the voicing (}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 
, for instance, would be reduced to little more than a weak snort). Normally all vowels are voiced as well, certainly so in Quenya (though in Japanese, vowels may lose their voicing in certain environments). But I have already referred to }{\b\lang1033 d}
{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 b}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 g}{\lang1033  as the "counterparts" of }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 p}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033 
; they are counterparts in the sense that the former are voiced and the latter are not. One characteristic feature of Quenya (at least the Noldorin dialect) is the very limited distribution of the voiced plosives }{\b\lang1033 d}{\lang1033 , }{
\b\lang1033 b}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 g}{\lang1033 ; they occur solely in the middle of words, and then only as part of the consonant clusters }{\b\lang1033 nd}{\lang1033 /}{\b\lang1033 ld}{\lang1033 /}{\b\lang1033 rd}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 mb}{
\lang1033 , and }{\b\lang1033 ng}{\lang1033 . Some speakers also pronounced }{\b\lang1033 lb}{\lang1033  instead of }{\b\lang1033 lv}{\lang1033 . (Possibly Tolkien imagined different rules for the poorly attested }{\i\lang1033 Vanyarin}{\lang1033 
 dialect of Quenya: The }{\i\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\lang1033  refers to a lament called }{\b\lang1033 Aldud\'e9ni\'eb}{\lang1033  made by a Vanyarin Elf; this word has puzzled researchers since the middle }{\b\lang1033 d}{\lang1033 
 occurs in a position that would be quite impossible in Noldorin Quenya.)
\par \tab }{\i\lang1033 Syllables}{\lang1033 : Made up of vowels and consonants, speech is not an undifferentiated outburst of sound. Rather it is perceived to be organized into rhythmic units called }{\i\lang1033 syllables}{\lang1033 
. The shortest possible words are necessarily }{\i\lang1033 monosyllabic}{\lang1033 , having only one syllable \endash  like English }{\i\lang1033 from}{\lang1033  or its Quenya equivalent }{\b\lang1033 ho}{\lang1033 . Words of more than one syllable, }{
\i\lang1033 polysyllabic}{\lang1033  ones, form longer strings of rhythmic "beats". A word like }{\i\lang1033 faster}{\lang1033  has two syllables (}{\i\lang1033 fas-ter}{\lang1033 ), a word like }{\i\lang1033 wonderful}{\lang1033  has three (}{
\i\lang1033 won-der-ful}{\lang1033 ), a word like }{\i\lang1033 geography}{\lang1033  has four (}{\i\lang1033 ge-og-ra-phy}{\lang1033 ), and so on \endash 
 though obviously we can't go much further before the words would be felt to be impractically long and difficult to pronounce. Some oriental languages, like Vietname
se, show a great preference for monosyllabic words. But as is evident from the English examples just quoted, European languages often employ longer words, and Tolkien's Quenya makes extensive use of big mouthfuls (as does Finnish). Consider words like }{
\b\lang1033 Ainulindal\'eb}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\lang1033  (five syllables: }{\b\lang1033 ai-nu-lin-da-l\'eb}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 sil-ma-ril-li-on}{\lang1033 
). An uninflected Quenya word typically has two or three syllables, and this number is often increased by adding inflectional endings, or by compounding.
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang1033 THE SOUNDS OF QUENYA
\par }{\lang1033 In Quenya, the basic }{\i\lang1033 vowels}{\lang1033  are }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 
 (short and long). They may also be combined into }{\i\lang1033 diphthongs}{\lang1033 , groups of two basic vowels pronounced together as one syllable: There are three diphthongs in -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 ai}{\lang1033 , }{
\b\lang1033 oi}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ui}{\lang1033 ) and three in -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 au}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 eu}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 iu}{\lang1033 , though the diphthongs }{\b\lang1033 eu}{\lang1033  and }{
\b\lang1033 iu}{\lang1033  are quite rare). The }{\i\lang1033 consonants }{\lang1033 of Third Age Quenya may be listed as }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033  (= }{\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033 ), }{\b\lang1033 d}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 f}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 
g}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 gw}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 hy}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 hw}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ly}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 m}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 , }{
\b\lang1033 nw}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ny}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 p}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 qu}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ry}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ty}{
\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 v}{\lang1033 ,}{\b\lang1033  y}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033  (this listing is not wholly uncontroversial; the consonant system of Quenya can be plausibly analyzed in more than one way). In Elvish writing, the }{
\i\lang1033 Tengwar}{\lang1033  orthography also upholds the distinction between some consonants that by the Third Age had come to be pronounced alike and thus merged altogether (}{\b\lang1033 \'fe}{\lang1033  merging with }{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 
, while initial }{\b\lang1033 \'f1}{\lang1033  fell together with }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  \endash 
 see the discussion of spelling conventions). In the transcription and spelling employed in this course, the former presence of "lost" distinct consonants is reflected in two cases only: }{\b\lang1033 hl}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 hr}{\lang1033 
, that were originally }{\i\lang1033 unvoiced}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 , but later they merged with normal }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 
 (and are therefore not included on the list of Third Age Quenya consonants above). Thus we will spell, say, }{\b\lang1033 hr\'edv\'eb}{\lang1033  ("winter") in this way despite the fact that Tolkien imagined the typical Third Age pronunciation to 
be simply "r\'edv\'eb" (with a normal }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 ).
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Though the consonants }{\b\lang1033 hy}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 gw}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 hw}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ly}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 nw}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ny}{
\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ry}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ty}{\lang1033 , and }{\b\lang1033 qu}{\lang1033  (and }{\b\lang1033 hr}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 hl}{\lang1033 ) must here be written as two letters (as }{\i\lang1033 digraphs}{\lang1033 
), they should evidently be taken as unitary sounds: Their pronunciation will be discussed in greater detail below. The digraphs in -}{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033  represent }{\i\lang1033 labialized}{\lang1033  consonants, while the digraphs in -}{
\b\lang1033 y}{\lang1033  stand for }{\i\lang1033 palatalized}{\lang1033  consonants; again, see below for further discussion of these terms. It should be understood that }{\b\lang1033 qu}{\lang1033  is simply an aesthetic way of spelling 
what would otherwise be represented as }{\b\lang1033 cw}{\lang1033  (most people will agree that }{\b\lang1033 Quenya}{\lang1033  looks better than }{\b\lang1033 Cwenya}{\lang1033 ), so }{\b\lang1033 qu}{\lang1033 , like }{\b\lang1033 nw}{\lang1033 
, is a labialized consonant. When counting syllables one must remember that there is no actual vowel }{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  in }{\b\lang1033 qu}{\lang1033 ; "u" here stands for }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033 . A word like }{\b\lang1033 alqua}{\lang1033 
 ("swan") thus has only two syllables: }{\b\lang1033 al-qua}{\lang1033  (= }{\b\lang1033 al-cwa}{\lang1033 ). One must not think "al-qu-a" and conclude that there are actually three syllables. In Tengwar writing, }{\b\lang1033 qu}{\lang1033 
 is denoted by a single letter, and in most early sources, Tolkien also used the single letter }{\b\lang1033 q}{\lang1033  to represent it.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab }{\i\lang1033 Double consonants:}{\lang1033  Some consonants also occur in }{\i\lang1033 long}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 double}{\lang1033 
 versions; double vs. single consonants may be compared to long vs. short vowels. The "obvious" cases, sc. the double consonants directly represented in orthography, are }{\b\lang1033 cc}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ll}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 mm}{
\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 nn}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 pp}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 rr}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ss}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 tt}{\lang1033  (e.g. }{\b\lang1033 ecco}{\lang1033  "spear", }{\b\lang1033 colla}{\lang1033  "cloak", }{
\b\lang1033 lamma}{\lang1033  "sound", }{\b\lang1033 anna}{\lang1033  "gift", }{\b\lang1033 lappa}{\lang1033  "hem of robe", }{\b\lang1033 yarra}{\lang1033 - "to growl", }{\b\lang1033 ess\'eb}{\lang1033  "name", }{\b\lang1033 atta}{\lang1033 
 "two"). The group }{\b\lang1033 pp}{\lang1033  is very rare, only attested in material far predating the LotR. In the }{\i\lang1033 Note on Pronunciation}{\lang1033  appended to the }{\i\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\lang1033 
, Christopher Tolkien noted: "Consonants written twice are pronounced long, thus }{\i\lang1033 Yavanna}{\lang1033  has the long }{\i\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  heard in English }{\i\lang1033 unnamed}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 penknife}{\lang1033 
, not the short }{\i\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  in }{\i\lang1033 unaimed}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 penny}{\lang1033 ." Words like }{\b\lang1033 tana}{\lang1033  "that" vs. }{\b\lang1033 tanna}{\lang1033  "sign", }{\b\lang1033 tyel\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "ceases" vs. }{\b\lang1033 tyell\'eb}{\lang1033  "grade", }{\b\lang1033 ata}{\lang1033  "again" vs. }{\b\lang1033 atta}{\lang1033  "two" should be audibly distinct. \endash 
 It is possible that some of the consonants written as digraphs must also be counted as double consonants when they occur between vowels; e.g. }{\b\lang1033 ny}{\lang1033  = long or double palatalized }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  (more on this below). 

\par \tab }{\i\lang1033 Consonant clusters (vs. single consonants):}{\lang1033  It is difficult to pronounce many sequential consonants, so the languages of the word generally confine themselves to relatively }{\i\lang1033 small}{\lang1033 
 groups (or "clusters") of consonants. The most typical word, from just about any language, is a series of vowels and consonants (single ones or relatively short consonant clusters) alternating \endash 
 the "core" of each syllable usually being a vowel. Tolkien's Quenya is no exception; thi
s language actually has quite restrictive rules for how consonants and vowels can be combined into syllables and longer words. Even so, consonant clusters are quite common, but they are not distributed as "freely" as in English. While English and for that
 matter Sindarin allow consonant clusters at the beginning of words, Quenya does not (SD:417-418). A word like }{\i\lang1033 scream}{\lang1033 
, commencing with a cluster of no less than three consonants, would be quite impossible in Quenya. Tolkien noted that the name that the "Woses" or Wild Men had for themselves, }{\i\lang1033 Drughu}{\lang1033 , was adapted to Quenya as }{\b\lang1033 R\'fa}
{\lang1033  (UT:385). Quenya could not preserve the initial cluster }{\i\lang1033 dr}{\lang1033 - of the original form of this loan-word (even apart from the fact that Quenya could not have }{\b\lang1033 d}{\lang1033  in this position). Quenya does
 allow a limited number of consonant clusters }{\i\lang1033 medially}{\lang1033 , between vowels in the middle of words; among "frequent" of "favoured" clusters Tolkien cited }{\b\lang1033 ld}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 mb}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 mp}{
\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 nc}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 nd}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ng}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ngw}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 nqu}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 nt}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ps}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ts}{\lang1033 
 and }{\b\lang1033 x}{\lang1033  (for }{\b\lang1033 cs}{\lang1033 ). Hence we have such typical Quenya-style words as }{\b\lang1033 Elda}{\lang1033  "Elf", }{\b\lang1033 lamb\'eb}{\lang1033  "tongue", }{\b\lang1033 tumpo}{\lang1033  "hump", }{\b\lang1033 
ranco}{\lang1033  "arm" etc. }{\i\lang1033 Finally}{\lang1033 , at the end of words, only five single consonants may occur: only -}{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 , or -}{
\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  is permitted in this position (}{\i\lang1033 Letters}{\lang1033 :425; however, most Quenya words end in a vowel). Consonant }{\i\lang1033 clusters}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 double}{\lang1033 
 consonants are not normally found at the end of words, though they may occur if a final vowel drops out (is }{\i\lang1033 elided}{\lang1033 ) because the next word begins in the same or a similar vowel. Hence in LotR we have a "final" }{\b\lang1033 nn}{
\lang1033  in the phrase }{\b\lang1033 l\'famenn' omentielvo}{\lang1033  ("on the hour of our meeting"), but only because this is reduced from }{\b\lang1033 l\'famenna omentielvo}{\lang1033 
 (this full form occurring in WJ:367 and Letters:424). The only genuine consonant cluster occurring at the end of a word seems to be }{\b\lang1033 nt}{\lang1033  used a specific grammatical ending (}{\i\lang1033 dual dative}{\lang1033 
, to be discussed in later lessons) \endash  e.g. }{\b\lang1033 ciryant}{\lang1033  "for a couple of ships", formed from }{\b\lang1033 cirya}{\lang1033 
 "ship". Tolkien's earliest "Qenya" experiments, as recorded in the Qenya Lexicon of 1915, were more liberal in this respect. "Qenya" allowe
d more final consonants and even final consonant clusters, but as LotR-style Quenya evolved in Tolkien's notes, he tightened up the phonology. Thus he gave the language a more clearly defined flavour.
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang1033 PRONUNCIATION
\par }{\i\lang1033 Vowels:}{\lang1033  Quenya vowels are pure. For peop
le who want to pronounce Elvish vowels with some degree of accuracy, Tolkien recommended Italian vowels as a model (as did Zamenhof for Esperanto, by the way). Speakers of English have an ingrained habit of blurring many vowels, especially when they are n
ot fully stressed; hence in a word like }{\i\lang1033 banana}{\lang1033 
 it is typically only the middle A that comes out as a "proper" A-sound. The two other A's, that are not stressed, are typically made to sound like a blurred, obscure "reduction vowel" that linguists call a }{\i\lang1033 schwa}{\lang1033 
 (from a Hebrew word for nothingness; English textbooks sometimes prefer the spelling "shwa"). But in Quenya }{\i\lang1033 all}{\lang1033  vowels, in }{\i\lang1033 all}{\lang1033 
 positions, must be clearly and distinctly pronounced; any tendencies to "blur" them must be strongly resisted.
\par \tab As we remember, Quenya has both }{\i\lang1033 long}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 short}{\lang1033  vowels, the long ones being marked with an accent: }{\b\lang1033 \'e1}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 \'e9}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 \'f3}{\lang1033 , }{
\b\lang1033 \'fa}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 \'ed}{\lang1033  vs. short }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 
. Long and short vowels must be kept apart and pronounced clearly distinct. Sometimes vowel length is the only thing that makes otherwise similar words distinct: for instance, }{\b\lang1033 cu}{\lang1033  with a short }{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 
 means "dove", whereas }{\b\lang1033 c\'fa}{\lang1033  with a long }{\b\lang1033 \'fa}{\lang1033  means "crescent".
\par \tab Long }{\b\lang1033 \'e1}{\lang1033  can be sounded as in English }{\i\lang1033 f}{\b\i\lang1033 a}{\i\lang1033 ther}{\lang1033 : }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1}{\lang1033  "hand", }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1r\'eb}{\lang1033  "flame", }{\b\lang1033 qu\'e1co}{\lang1033 
 "crow". However, English does not have anything corresponding to Quenya }{\i\lang1033 short}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 . It is absolutely necessary to master it, for short }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 
 is by far the commonest of Quenya vowels. Tolkien noted that it should be more "open" than the long }{\b\lang1033 \'e1}{\lang1033 . What we want is a vowel that by its sound (or }{\i\lang1033 quality}{\lang1033 ) is about midway between the }{
\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 's of English }{\i\lang1033 f}{\b\i\lang1033 a}{\i\lang1033 ther}{\lang1033  and English }{\i\lang1033 c}{\b\i\lang1033 a}{\i\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  \endash  but as for its length (or }{\i\lang1033 quantity}{\lang1033 
), it should by all means be short as in the latter word. The vowel heard in Spanish }{\i\lang1033 p}{\b\i\lang1033 a}{\i\lang1033 dre}{\lang1033  will do.}{\i\lang1033  }{\lang1033 Speakers of English may pin down a short }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 
 by isolating the first part of the diphthong }{\b\lang1033 ai}{\lang1033  as in }{\i\lang1033 aisle}{\lang1033 . 
\par }{\fs20\lang1033 NOTE: If you have the original }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Star Wars}{\fs20\lang1033 
 movie available, listen carefully when Harrison Ford first appears about 45 minutes in and introduces himself as "Han Solo": Ford actually produces a nice Quenya-style short }{\b\fs20\lang1033 a}{\fs20\lang1033  in "Han", making 
this syllable sound as it would in Quenya words (e.g. }{\b\fs20\lang1033 hanu}{\fs20\lang1033  "a male" or }{\b\fs20\lang1033 handa}{\fs20\lang1033  "intelligent"; apparently there is even a Quenya word }{\b\fs20\lang1033 han}{\fs20\lang1033 
 "beyond"). But later in the }{\i\fs20\lang1033 SW}{\fs20\lang1033  movies, the vowel of "Han" is inconsistently pronounced either with a long }{\i\fs20\lang1033 a}{\fs20\lang1033  as in English }{\i\fs20\lang1033 f}{\i\fs20\ul\lang1033 a}{
\i\fs20\lang1033 ther}{\fs20\lang1033  or with the vowel heard in English }{\i\fs20\lang1033 c}{\i\fs20\ul\lang1033 a}{\i\fs20\lang1033 t}{\fs20\lang1033 
, which is precisely the vowel to be avoided in Quenya. Linguistic consistency was never the, ahem, force of }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Star Wars}{\fs20\lang1033 . By the way, do you remember }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Endor}{\fs20\lang1033 
, the green moon where George Lucas placed his reinvented teddy bears in the third movie? Guess what the Quenya word for "Middle-earth" is! Lucas would surely say that his intention was to pay }{\i\fs20\lang1033 tribute}{\fs20\lang1033  to Tolkien...

\par 
\par UPDATED NOTE: Now that Peter Jackson's }{\i\fs20\lang1033 The Fellowship of the Ring}{\fs20\lang1033  has appeared, I can quote examp
les from the soundtrack of this movie as well; most people interested in Tolkien's work will surely have seen it, and many are also going to buy it on video or DVD. Good examples of short Elvish }{\b\fs20\lang1033 a}{\fs20\lang1033 
 occur in the Sindarin name }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Caradhras}{\fs20\lang1033  "Redhorn" as pronounce
d  by Christopher Lee ("Saruman") in the scene where his spying crows return to Isengard: "So, Gandalf, you try to lead them over Caradhras..." Lee also gets the short }{\b\fs20\lang1033 a}{\fs20\lang1033 
's more or less right in a scene following shortly afterwards, when he stands on the top of Isengard reading a Quenya invocation: }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Nai y}{\b\fs20\ul\lang1033 a}{\b\fs20\lang1033 rv}{\b\fs20\ul\lang1033 a}{\b\fs20\lang1033 x\'eb}{
\b\fs20\ul\lang1033 a}{\b\fs20\lang1033  r}{\b\fs20\ul\lang1033 a}{\b\fs20\lang1033 ssely}{\b\fs20\ul\lang1033 a}{\b\fs20\lang1033  t}{\b\fs20\ul\lang1033 a}{\b\fs20\lang1033 ltuv}{\b\fs20\ul\lang1033 a}{\b\fs20\lang1033  notto-c}{\b\fs20\ul\lang1033 a}{
\b\fs20\lang1033 rinn}{\b\fs20\ul\lang1033 a}{\b\fs20\lang1033 r}{\fs20\lang1033 ... (but the last word sounds almost like }{\b\fs20\lang1033 c}{\b\fs20\ul\lang1033 \'e1}{\b\fs20\lang1033 rinnar}{\fs20\lang1033 , the first vowel being }{\i\fs20\lang1033 
long}{\fs20\lang1033  \endash  after all, Chris Lee is not a native speaker of Quenya!) 
\par }{\lang1033 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 An extra challenge for speakers of English is to pronounce -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  as a full vowel at the }{\i\lang1033 end}{\lang1033  of words. Where English orthography has a final -}{
\i\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 , it is normally pronounced like a schwa. Contrast the English and the Spanish pronunciation of the final vowel in a name like }{\i\lang1033 Sara}{\lang1033 ; in Spanish, the English-style reduction or "blurring" of the -}{
\i\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  does not take place. In one very early source, Tolkien actually stated that "Qenya", like English, turned final, unaccented -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  into a schwa ("as in English }{\i\lang1033 dram}{\b\i\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 
", QL:9), but there is nothing to suggest that this idea was still valid decades later when he wrote the LotR. Indeed even the early source just referred to has it that there was one important dialect of "Qenya" where the weakening of final -}{
\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  did not take place. So speakers should try to pronounce a full }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  in all positions: neither of the }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 's in a word like }{\b\lang1033 anna}{\lang1033 
 "gift" should be pronounced as in the English name Anna.
\par Long }{\b\lang1033 \'e9 }{\lang1033 is another Quenya sound that does not occur in contemporary English. The long }{\i\lang1033 e }{\lang1033 of English became long }{\i\lang1033 i }{\lang1033 (like Quenya }{\b\lang1033 \'ed}{\lang1033 ) centuries ago 
\endash  though because of this descent it is still often spelt }{\i\lang1033 ee}{\lang1033 , as in }{\i\lang1033 see}{\lang1033 . Quenya }{\b\lang1033 \'e9}{\lang1033  has the value of German }{\i\lang1033 eh }{\lang1033 as in }{\i\lang1033 Mehr. }{
\lang1033 The pronunciation of }{\i\lang1033 ai }{\lang1033 in English }{\i\lang1033 air }{\lang1033 at least approaches }{\b\lang1033 \'e9}{\lang1033 , but this is really a short }{\b\lang1033 e }{\lang1033 followed by a schwa. Tolkien notes that long }{
\b\lang1033 \'e9 }{\lang1033 should be closer than short }{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033  (see LotR Appendix E), so just lengthening the vowel heard in English }{\i\lang1033 end }{\lang1033 
will not be quite sufficient. The quality of the vowel should be about midway between the vowels heard in English }{\i\lang1033 end }{\lang1033 and English }{\i\lang1033 see}{\lang1033 , but it should be long like the latter: }{\b\lang1033 n\'e9n}{
\lang1033  "water", }{\b\lang1033 r\'e9}{\lang1033  "day", }{\b\lang1033 m\'e9na}{\lang1033  "region".
\par }{\i\lang1033 Short}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 e }{\lang1033 may be pronounced as in English }{\i\lang1033 end. }{\lang1033 In Quenya this sound also occurs in final position. Since word-final }{\i\lang1033 e}{\b\lang1033  }{\lang1033 
is usually silent in English orthography, Tolkien often used the spelling }{\b\lang1033 \'eb }{\lang1033 in this position \endash 
 and throughout this course, this spelling is employed consistently. This is only to remind English readers that in Quenya, this letter is to be distinctly pronounced. But since word-final }{\i\lang1033 e }{\lang1033 
never occurs in spoken English, some speakers tend to substitute }{\i\lang1033 i }{\lang1033 or }{\i\lang1033 ey }{\lang1033 (following English practice in the rare cases of a final orthographic "e" being sounded, as when }{\i\lang1033 Jesse}{\lang1033 
 is pronounced "jessi", or }{\i\lang1033 karate}{\lang1033  is pronounced "karatey"). Quenya }{\b\lang1033 e }{\lang1033 should have the value described above in all positions. It must NOT be pronounced }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 , nor must there be a }{
\b\lang1033 y}{\lang1033 -like sound creeping after it: }{\b\lang1033 l\'f3m\'eb}{\lang1033  "night", }{\b\lang1033 mor\'eb}{\lang1033  "black", }{\b\lang1033 tinw\'eb}{\lang1033  "sparkle".
\par Long }{\b\lang1033 \'ed }{\lang1033 is pronounced as in English }{\i\lang1033 mach}{\b\i\lang1033 i}{\i\lang1033 ne}{\lang1033 ,}{\i\lang1033  }{\lang1033 that same as "ee" in English }{\i\lang1033 s}{\b\i\lang1033 ee}{\lang1033 : the Quenya word }{
\b\lang1033 s\'ed}{\lang1033  ("now") is similar in sound. Other examples include }{\b\lang1033 n\'eds}{\lang1033  "woman" and }{\b\lang1033 r\'edma}{\lang1033  "edge". This long }{\b\lang1033 \'ed}{\lang1033  must be noticeably longer than short }{
\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 , which}{\b\lang1033  }{\lang1033 may be pronounced like in English }{\i\lang1033 p}{\b\i\lang1033 i}{\i\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 : }{\b\lang1033 Titta}{\lang1033  "tiny", }{\b\lang1033 imb\'eb }{\lang1033 "between", }{\b\lang1033 
vinya}{\lang1033  "new". In one early source, Tolkien himself quoted the word }{\i\lang1033 pit}{\lang1033  as an example of short "Qenya" }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  (QL:8). Later writings suggest that the }{\i\lang1033 quality}{\lang1033 
 of the vowel-sound should be like the }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  of }{\i\lang1033 mach}{\b\i\lang1033 i}{\i\lang1033 ne}{\lang1033 , in English often spelt "ee" \endash  start with this sound and shorten it. (Before unvoiced stops, as in }{\i\lang1033 
feet}{\lang1033 , "ee" may be quite short also in English \endash  just make sure there is a distinction of length between }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 \'ed}{\lang1033 .) Notice that }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  is never pronounced }{
\b\lang1033 ai }{\lang1033 as in English }{\i\lang1033 fine}{\lang1033  = "fain".}{\i\lang1033  }{\lang1033 (Quenya }{\b\lang1033 fin\'eb }{\lang1033 "larch" has two syllables, the vowels being those heard in }{\i\lang1033 pit }{\lang1033 
[ideally a little closer]}{\i\lang1033  }{\lang1033 and }{\i\lang1033 pet}{\lang1033 , respectively.) Of course, this also goes for final -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 
 (usually a plural ending). If the student will forgive another Star Wars reference, George Lucas' }{\i\lang1033 Jedi}{\lang1033  may be "jedai" = "jed-eye", but Tolkien's }{\b\lang1033 Quendi}{\lang1033  are most definitely not "quendai". In Quenya, f
inal -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  should rather be pronounced as in }{\i\lang1033 Iraq}{\b\i\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 Mississipp}{\b\i\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 .
\par Long }{\b\lang1033 \'f3 }{\lang1033 may be pronounced more or less as in English }{\i\lang1033 s}{\b\i\lang1033 o}{\i\lang1033 re}{\lang1033 , but preferably a little tenser and "closer" (midway between the vowel-sounds of English }{\i\lang1033 s}{
\b\i\lang1033 o}{\i\lang1033 re }{\lang1033 and English "oo" as in }{\i\lang1033 s}{\b\i\lang1033 oo}{\i\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 ): }{\b\lang1033 m\'f3l}{\lang1033  "slave", }{\b\lang1033 t\'f3}{\lang1033  "wool", }{\b\lang1033 \'f3ma}{\lang1033 
 "voice". Short }{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033  may be pronounced as in English }{\i\lang1033 f}{\b\i\lang1033 o}{\i\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  (when accented), or as in }{\i\lang1033 b}{\b\i\lang1033 o}{\i\lang1033 x}{\lang1033 
. The quality of the latter vowel may be just a little too open and }{\i\lang1033 A}{\lang1033 -like according to Tolkien's descriptions. Yet this is the pronunciation he himself used in most cases in the recording of him reading }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri
\'eb}{\lang1033 ; it should perhaps be attributed to his English accent. Some words with }{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033 : }{\b\lang1033 rondo}{\lang1033  "cave", }{\b\lang1033 olos}{\lang1033  "dream", }{\b\lang1033 tolto}{\lang1033 
 "eight". Of course, Quenya }{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033  is never pronounced "ow" as in English }{\i\lang1033 so}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 also}{\lang1033 ; a word like }{\b\lang1033 tolto}{\lang1033  must NOT come out as "tol-tow". Neither must }{
\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033  ever be reduced to a schwa or dropped altogether; be especially mindful of the ending -}{\b\lang1033 on}{\lang1033 , often found in masculine names (and also in plural }{\i\lang1033 genitives}{\lang1033  like }{\b\lang1033 
Silmarillion}{\lang1033 ; see later lessons). "English-style" pronunciation of a name like }{\b\lang1033 Sauron}{\lang1033  would result in what a baffled Elf might try to represent in writing as }{\b\lang1033 S\'f3r'n}{\lang1033  (or at best }{
\b\lang1033 S\'f3ren}{\lang1033 ). The final -}{\b\lang1033 on}{\lang1033  should sound rather like the first syllable of English }{\i\lang1033 online}{\lang1033 , with the vowel fully intact even though it is unaccented in }{\b\lang1033 Sauron}{
\lang1033 . In the Jackson movie, the actors usually deliver a good pronunciation of this name; especially listen to how "Gandalf" and "Saruman" pronounce it. Good examples of short Elvish }{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033  also occur in the name }{\b\lang1033 
Mordor}{\lang1033  as pronounced by the same two actors.
\par Long }{\b\lang1033 \'fa }{\lang1033 is the vowel of English }{\i\lang1033 br}{\b\i\lang1033 u}{\i\lang1033 te}{\lang1033 , in English often spelt "oo" as in }{\i\lang1033 f}{\b\i\lang1033 oo}{\i\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 : }{\b\lang1033 N\'famen}{\lang1033 
 "west", }{\b\lang1033 c\'fa}{\lang1033  "crescent", }{\b\lang1033 y\'fayo}{\lang1033  "both". It must be distinctly longer than short }{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 , which is pronounced somewhat like the vowel of English }{\i\lang1033 p}{\b\i\lang1033 u}{
\i\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  (NOT like in English }{\i\lang1033 c}{\b\i\lang1033 u}{\i\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 ). Ideally, Quenya short }{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  should be a little more "rounded" than the vowel of }{\i\lang1033 p}{\b\i\lang1033 u}{
\i\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 ; it should be simply a shorter version of the long }{\b\lang1033 \'fa}{\lang1033  or "oo" described above: }{\b\lang1033 Cundu }{\lang1033 "prince", }{\b\lang1033 nuru}{\lang1033  "death", }{\b\lang1033 ulundo}{\lang1033 
 "monster".}{\i\lang1033  }{\lang1033 Notice that Quenya }{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  is never pronounced "yu" as in English }{\i\lang1033 union}{\lang1033 ; }{\b\lang1033 ulundo}{\lang1033  should not become "yulundo".
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par Speakers of English must be especially mindful of their vowels when a combination }{\i\lang1033 vowel}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  occurs. In the combinations }{\b\lang1033 ar}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 or}{\lang1033 
, many speakers of English have a tendency to }{\i\lang1033 lengthen}{\lang1033  the vowel even where it should be short (and many would also let the }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 
 drop out, especially when it is followed by another consonant). But in Quenya words like }{\b\lang1033 narda}{\lang1033  ("knot") or }{\b\lang1033 lorna}{\lang1033  ("asleep"), the vowel before the }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  must be }{\i\lang1033 short}
{\lang1033 , as indicated by the absence of the accent mark. It is not permissible to let the pronunciation drift towards "n\'e1(r)da", "l\'f3(r)na", no matter how tempting this is to people used to English speech-habits.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Where the groups }{\b\lang1033 er}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ir}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ur}{\lang1033  occur (e.g. in words like }{\b\lang1033 serc\'eb}{\lang1033  "blood", }{\b\lang1033 tirno}
{\lang1033  "watcher", }{\b\lang1033 turma}{\lang1033  "shield"), speakers of English must take care NOT to pronounce the vowels after the fashion of English }{\i\lang1033 s}{\b\i\lang1033 e}{\i\lang1033 rve}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 g}{\b\i\lang1033 i}{
\i\lang1033 rl}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 t}{\b\i\lang1033 u}{\i\lang1033 rn}{\lang1033 . (I once had an English teacher who described the vowel of "girl" as one of the ugliest sounds of the English language. She taught English at }{\i\lang1033 university
}{\lang1033  level, so she should know \endash  though perhaps she wasn't wholly serious...) Short }{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 
 should sound just as described above, wholly irrespective of the following }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 . In LotR Appendix E, Tolkien noted that }{\b\lang1033 er, ir}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ur}{\lang1033  should sound, not as in English }{\i\lang1033 
fern}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 fir}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 fur}{\lang1033 , but rather like }{\i\lang1033 air}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 eer}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 oor}{\lang1033 
 (that is, like it would be natural for a speaker of English to pronounce orthographic "air, eer, oor" \endash  however, it should be understood that this would only be an approximation of the ideal pronunc
iation). In the Peter Jackson movie, the actors struggle to pronounce the final syllable of the Quenya name }{\b\lang1033 Isildur}{\lang1033 
 correctly, with variable results. In the flash-back scene where Elrond (played by Hugo Weaving) leads Isildur into Mount Doom and urges him to destroy the Ring, Weaving's pronunciation of the name }{\b\lang1033 Isildur}{\lang1033  is very good \endash 
 following Tolkien's guidelines to the letter.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 Diphthongs:}{\lang1033  In addition to the "basic", unitary vowel-sounds discussed above (what linguists would call the }{\i\lang1033 monophthongs}{\lang1033 ), we have the diphthongs \endash 
 combinations of two basic vowels that are run together into one syllable, in many ways behaving like a unitary vowel for the purpose of word-building: The Quenya diphthongs are }{\b\lang1033 ai}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 au}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 eu}
{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 iu}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 oi}{\lang1033 , and }{\b\lang1033 ui}{\lang1033 .
\par \tab \'a4 The diphthong }{\b\lang1033 ai}{\lang1033  is the same that is heard in English }{\i\lang1033 aisle}{\lang1033 . It is NOT like the one in English }{\i\lang1033 mail}{\lang1033 
, though English orthographic "ai" usually represents the latter sound (can anyone think of other exceptions than }{\i\lang1033 aisle}{\lang1033 ?) The first syllable of }{\b\lang1033 faila}{\lang1033  "just, generous" must not pronounced
 like the English word }{\i\lang1033 fail}{\lang1033 , since Quenya }{\b\lang1033 ai}{\lang1033  always has the sound of English }{\i\lang1033 I}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 eye}{\lang1033 : }{\b\lang1033 Aica}{\lang1033  "fell, terrible", }{\b\lang1033 
caima}{\lang1033  "bed", }{\b\lang1033 aira}{\lang1033  "holy". Of course, the first syllable of the latter word sounds nothing like English }{\i\lang1033 air}{\lang1033 !
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \'a4 The diphthong }{\b\lang1033 au }{\lang1033 is pronounced as in German }{\i\lang1033 H}{\b\i\lang1033 au}{\i\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 , or more or less as the "ow" of English }{\i\lang1033 c}{
\b\i\lang1033 ow}{\lang1033 : }{\b\lang1033 aul\'eb}{\lang1033  "invention", }{\b\lang1033 laur\'eba}{\lang1033  "golden", }{\b\lang1033 taur\'eb}{\lang1033  "forest". It is never sounded}{\b\lang1033  }{\lang1033 as in English }{\i\lang1033 caught}{
\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 aura}{\lang1033  (in which words "au" is pronounced rather like Quenya }{\b\lang1033 \'f3}{\lang1033 ). In his "Note on Pronunciation" appended to the }{\i\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\lang1033 
, Christopher Tolkien notes that the first syllable of }{\b\lang1033 Sauron }{\lang1033 should be like English }{\i\lang1033 sour}{\lang1033 , not English }{\i\lang1033 sore}{\lang1033 . (However, the diphthong in }{\i\lang1033 sour }{\lang1033 
is in British English followed by a schwa \endash  a faint reminiscence of the otherwise silent final }{\i\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 . This schwa should not be pronounced in }{\b\lang1033 Sauron}{\lang1033 .)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx1560\adjustright {\lang1033 \'a4 The diphthong }{\b\lang1033 eu}{\lang1033  does not occur in English, but it is not dissimilar to the "o" of English }{\i\lang1033 s}{\b\i\lang1033 o}{\lang1033 
. The only difference is that while the first part of the diphthong is a schwa in English, it should be a normal }{\b\lang1033 e }{\lang1033 (as in }{\i\lang1033 end}{\lang1033 
) in Quenya. In particular, some British upper-class pronunciations of English "o" as in }{\i\lang1033 s}{\b\i\lang1033 o}{\lang1033  come close to Quenya }{\b\lang1033 eu}{\lang1033  (but the American pronunciation does not). Quenya examples: }{
\b\lang1033 leuca}{\lang1033  "snake", }{\b\lang1033 neuma}{\lang1033  "snare", }{\b\lang1033 peu}{\lang1033  "pair of lips". This diphthong is not very common.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\cf1\lang1033 \'a4 The}{\lang1033  diphthong }{\b\lang1033 iu}{\lang1033  may be sounded like }{\i\lang1033 yu }{\lang1033 in English }{\i\lang1033 yule}{\lang1033 
, according to the usual Third Age Pronunciation. Tolkien imagined that originally, it had rather been a "falling" diphthong like the other Quenya diphthongs, stressed on the first rat
her than the last element (LotR Appendix E). However, the Third Age pronunciation would be equally "valid" also within the mythos, and for speakers of English it is easier to achieve. This diphthong is in any case very rare; in the }{\i\lang1033 
Etymologies}{\lang1033  it is only attested in a handful of words (}{\b\lang1033 miul\'eb}{\lang1033  "whining, mewing", }{\b\lang1033 piuta}{\lang1033  "spit", }{\b\lang1033 siul\'eb}{\lang1033  "incitement" and the group }{\b\lang1033 tiuca}{\lang1033 
 "thick, fat", }{\b\lang1033 tiuco}{\lang1033  "thigh" and }{\b\lang1033 tiuya}{\lang1033 - "swell, grow fat" \endash  a few more examples of }{\b\lang1033 iu}{\lang1033  could be quoted from Tolkien's early "Qenya" material).
\par \'a4 The diphthong }{\b\lang1033 oi}{\lang1033  is easy, corresponding to English "oi" or "oy" as in }{\b\i\lang1033 oi}{\i\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 t}{\b\i\lang1033 oy}{\lang1033 : }{\b\lang1033 coir\'eba}{\lang1033  "living", }{\b\lang1033 
soica}{\lang1033  "thirsty", }{\b\lang1033 oira}{\lang1033  "eternal".
\par \'a4 The diphthong }{\b\lang1033 ui}{\lang1033  Tolkien sometimes compared to the sound occurring in English }{\i\lang1033 r}{\b\i\lang1033 ui}{\i\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 . This is a rather surprising example, for sur
ely the word "ruin" is not normally pronounced as containing a diphthong, but as two distinct syllables: }{\i\lang1033 ru-in}{\lang1033 . Rather think "ooy" as in the English phrase }{\i\lang1033 t}{\b\i\lang1033 oo}{\i\lang1033  }{\b\i\lang1033 y}{
\i\lang1033 oung}{\lang1033 : }{\b\lang1033 huin\'eb}{\lang1033  "shadow", }{\b\lang1033 cuil\'eb}{\lang1033  "life", }{\b\lang1033 uil\'eb}{\lang1033  "(long, trailing) plant". Notice that the combination }{\b\lang1033 qui}{\lang1033  does }{\i\lang1033 
not}{\lang1033  contain this diphthong; this is just a more visually pleasing way of spelling }{\b\lang1033 cwi}{\lang1033  (e.g. }{\b\lang1033 orqui}{\lang1033  "Orcs" = }{\b\lang1033 orcwi}{\lang1033 ).
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par All other groups of vowels are }{\i\lang1033 not}{\lang1033  diphthongs, but simply vowels belonging to separate syllables, to be pronounced distinctly. In linguistic terms, vowels that are in direct contact without forming diphthongs are said to be in }{
\i\lang1033 hiatus}{\lang1033 . Primitive Elvish apparently did not have such combinations, at least not in the middle of words: Tolkien had F\'ebanor concluding that "our fathers...in bu
ilding words took the vowels and parted them with the consonants as walls" (VT39:10). But some consonants had been lost in Quenya, so that vowels that were originally so "parted" had come into direct contact (VT39:6). In Quenya we even have polysyllabic a
ll-vowel words like }{\b\lang1033 E\'e4}{\lang1033  (a name of the universe) or }{\b\lang1033 oa}{\lang1033  ("away"). The most frequent combinations of vowels in hiatus are }{\b\lang1033 ea}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 eo}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ie}{
\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 io}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 oa}{\lang1033 ; each vowel should be sounded "by itself". Tolkien often emphasizes this fact by adding }{\i\lang1033 diaereses}{\lang1033  or "dots" to one of t
he vowels, and in the consistent spelling here imposed on the material, we regularly write }{\b\lang1033 \'eba}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 E\'e4}{\lang1033 ), }{\b\lang1033 \'ebo}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 E\'f6}{\lang1033 ), }{\b\lang1033 o\'eb}{
\lang1033 . Thus there is no excuse for such mistakes as pronouncing }{\b\lang1033 \'eba}{\lang1033  as in English }{\i\lang1033 h}{\b\i\lang1033 ea}{\i\lang1033 rt}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 pl}{\b\i\lang1033 ea}{\i\lang1033 se}{\lang1033 , or }{
\b\lang1033 o\'eb}{\lang1033  as in }{\i\lang1033 can}{\b\i\lang1033 oe}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 f}{\b\i\lang1033 oe}{\i\lang1033 tus}{\lang1033 . (Other distortions are apparently also possible: Cate Blanchett simply reduced }{\b\lang1033 E\'e4rendil
}{\lang1033  to "Erendil" the one time her version of Galadriel pronounces this name in the Jackson movie: "I give you the light of E[\'e4]rendil, our most beloved star..." Can we have an extra vowel for the Director's Cut, please?)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 In this course we do not use the diaeresis in the combinations }{\b\lang1033 ie}{\lang1033  (except when final) and }{\b\lang1033 oa}{\lang1033 , but as indicated by the spelling }{\b\lang1033 i
\'eb}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 \'f6a}{\lang1033  in certain Tolkien manuscripts, the vowels must be pronounced distinctly and not drawn together as in English }{\i\lang1033 p}{\b\i\lang1033 ie}{\i\lang1033 ce}{\lang1033  (or }{\i\lang1033 t}{
\b\i\lang1033 ie}{\lang1033 ), or English }{\i\lang1033 l}{\b\i\lang1033 oa}{\i\lang1033 d}{\lang1033 . In accordance with this, Christopher Tolkien in the }{\i\lang1033 Note on Pronunciation}{\lang1033  that he appended to the }{\i\lang1033 Silmarillion}
{\lang1033  indicates that the name }{\b\lang1033 Nienna}{\lang1033  is to be pronounced }{\b\lang1033 Ni-enna}{\lang1033 , not "Neena" as if }{\b\lang1033 ie}{\lang1033  were sounded as in English }{\i\lang1033 piece}{\lang1033 
. (Immediately after the line in which she mangles the name }{\b\lang1033 E\'e4rendil}{\lang1033 , Cate Blanchett pronounces the Quenya word }{\b\lang1033 nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 
, "farewell". I'm glad to say that she did a better job with this word, getting the -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033  more or less right!) Some words with vowels in hiatus: }{\b\lang1033 f\'eba}{\lang1033  "soul", }{\b\lang1033 l\'ebo}{\lang1033  "shade", 
}{\b\lang1033 lo\'ebnd\'eb}{\lang1033  "year-middle" (the middle day of the year according to the Elvish calendar), }{\b\lang1033 coa}{\lang1033  "house", }{\b\lang1033 ti\'eb}{\lang1033  "path".
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 Consonants: }{\lang1033 Most Quenya consonants are easy to pronounce for people used to speaking a Western language. These points may be observed:
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \'a4 }{\b\lang1033 C}{\lang1033  is }{\i\lang1033 always}{\lang1033  pronounced }{\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033 , never }{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 ; indeed Tolkien does use the letter }{\b\lang1033 k}{
\lang1033  rather than }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033  in many sources. }{\b\lang1033 Celma}{\lang1033  "channel" or }{\b\lang1033 cirya}{\lang1033  "ship" must }{\i\lang1033 not}{\lang1033 
 come out as "selma", "sirya". (This goes for Sindarin spelling as well: When }{\b\lang1033 Celeborn}{\lang1033  is pronounced "Seleborn" in the Rankin/Bass animated version of LotR, it clearly shows that the moviemakers never made it to Appendix E.)

\par \'a4 In the groups }{\b\lang1033 hw}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 hy}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 hl}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 hr}{\lang1033 , the letter }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033  is not to be pronounced separately. These are just digraphs
 denoting unitary consonants:
\par \'a4 What is spelt }{\b\lang1033 hl}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 hr}{\lang1033  was originally }{\i\lang1033 unvoiced}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 
. That is, these sounds were pronounced without vibration in the vocal chords, resulting in what may be described as "whispered" versions of normal }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 . (If you can isolate the }{\i\lang1033 l}{
\lang1033  of English }{\i\lang1033 please}{\lang1033 , you will have an unvoiced }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033  \endash  though in this case, it is just "incidentally" unvoiced because of the influence from the unvoiced plosive }{\b\lang1033 p}{\lang1033 
 immediately preceding it. English never has unvoiced }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033  as an independent sound of speech, as Quenya originally did.) In Quenya, these sounds are quite rare; examples include }{\b\lang1033 hr\'edv\'eb}{\lang1033  "winter" and }{
\b\lang1033 hl\'f3c\'eb}{\lang1033  "serpent, dragon". However, Tolkien stated that by the Third Age, }{\b\lang1033 hr}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 hl}{\lang1033  had come to be pronounced as normal voiced }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 l}{
\lang1033 , though the }{\i\lang1033 spelling}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 hl}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 hr}{\lang1033  apparently persisted in writing.
\par \'a4 What is spelt }{\b\lang1033 hw}{\lang1033  corresponds to English }{\i\lang1033 wh}{\lang1033  in dialects where this is still distinct from normal }{\i\lang1033 w}{\lang1033  (e.g., }{\i\lang1033 witch}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 which}{\lang1033 
 are audibly distinct words \endash  American English, as well as northern British English, normally uphold this distinction, though it has been abandoned in the British Received Pronunciation). Put simply, }{\b\lang1033 hw}{\lang1033 
 is a (weak) version of the sound you make when you blow out a candle. }{\b\lang1033 Hw}{\lang1033  is not a very frequent sound in Quenya; this seems to be a quite complete list of the known words where it occurs: }{\b\lang1033 hwan}{\lang1033 
 "sponge, fungus", }{\b\lang1033 hwarin}{\lang1033  "crooked", }{\b\lang1033 hwarma}{\lang1033  "crossbar", }{\b\lang1033 hwerm\'eb}{\lang1033  "gesture-code", }{\b\lang1033 hwesta}{\lang1033  "breeze, breath, puff of air" (also as verb:}{\b\lang1033 
 hwesta}{\lang1033 - "to puff"), }{\b\lang1033 hwind\'eb}{\lang1033  "eddy, whirlpool".
\par \'a4 What is spelt }{\b\lang1033 hy}{\lang1033  represents a sound that may occur in English, but that is not normally recognized as a distinct consonant in this language. }{\b\lang1033 Hy}{\lang1033  denotes what by a German term is often referred to as 
}{\i\lang1033 ich}{\lang1033 -}{\i\lang1033 Laut}{\lang1033  or "}{\i\lang1033 ich}{\lang1033 -sound", since it is exemplified by "ch" in the German word }{\i\lang1033 ich}{\lang1033  ("I"). To speakers of English it may sound much like }{\i\lang1033 sh}{
\lang1033  (one imagines Kennedy training long and hard to avoid "Ish bin ein Berliner"). Still, as I said, a (weak) version of the sound in question may often be heard in English as well: In words like }{\i\lang1033 hew}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 huge}{
\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 human}{\lang1033 , the }{\i\lang1033 h}{\lang1033  may be pronounced like an (obscure) }{\b\lang1033 hy}{\lang1033 . Cf. SD:418-419, where Tolkien states that in Quenya or "Avallonian", the sound }{\b\lang1033 hy}{\lang1033 
 is "approximately equivalent to...}{\i\lang1033 h}{\lang1033  in }{\i\lang1033 huge}{\lang1033 ". In LotR Appendix E, Tolkien also pointed out that }{\b\lang1033 hy}{\lang1033  has the same relationship to }{\b\lang1033 y}{\lang1033  as }{\b\lang1033 hw}
{\lang1033  (discussed above) has to normal }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033 : one is unvoiced, the other voiced. So another way of arriving at }{\b\lang1033 hy}{\lang1033  is to start with the sound of }{\b\lang1033 y}{\lang1033  (as in }{\i\lang1033 you}{
\lang1033 ) and produce a voiceless, "whispered" variant of it. Once you have the sound pinned down, you only have to strengthen it; it should be pronounced with the same force as English }{\i\lang1033 sh}{\lang1033 : }{\b\lang1033 Hyarmen}{\lang1033 
 "south", }{\b\lang1033 hyalma}{\lang1033  "shell, conch", }{\b\lang1033 hyell\'eb}{\lang1033  "glass". It seems that }{\b\lang1033 hy}{\lang1033  mostly occurs at the }{\i\lang1033 beginning}{\lang1033  of words; }{\b\lang1033 ahya}{\lang1033 
- "change" is presently the sole known example of }{\b\lang1033 hy}{\lang1033  occurring between vowels in the middle of a word. However, }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033  in the combination }{\b\lang1033 ht}{\lang1033 
 following certain vowels should also be pronounced like }{\b\lang1033 hy}{\lang1033 ; see below. \endash  In LotR Appendix E, Tolkien noted that speakers of Westron (the supposed "original language" of the Red Book, t
hat Tolkien "translated" into English) often substituted the sound of }{\i\lang1033 sh}{\lang1033  for Quenya }{\b\lang1033 hy}{\lang1033 
. Speakers of English who don't care about subtle phonological details may of course do the same, turning a word like }{\b\lang1033 hyalma}{\lang1033  into "shalma". This would be a pronunciation 
that existed also within the Middle-earth setting, though it was not quite like the proper Elvish pronunciation (and it does seem best to aim for the latter!) I guess many speakers of English would hardly be able to tell the difference, though. Incidental
ly, one can achieve a pretty good }{\b\lang1033 hy}{\lang1033  by starting from }{\i\lang1033 sh}{\lang1033 ; just make sure that your tongue is not raised (you may press its tip against the lower teeth to be certain of that). If you try to pronounce }{
\i\lang1033 sh}{\lang1033  with the tongue in this position, what comes out ought to sound like }{\b\lang1033 hy}{\lang1033 .
\par \'a4 Outside the groups }{\b\lang1033 hw}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 hy}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 hl}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 hr}{\lang1033 , the letter }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033 
 does represent an independent sound, but it is pronounced somewhat differently in different positions. It seems that originally, Quenya }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033  (at least where it comes from Primitive Elvish }{\i\lang1033 kh}{\lang1033 )
 was typically }{\i\lang1033 stronger}{\lang1033  than English }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033  \endash  that is, a "breath-}{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033 " as in }{\b\i\lang1033 h}{\i\lang1033 igh}{\lang1033 . In F\'ebanor's day it was apparently pronounced like 
}{\i\lang1033 ch}{\lang1033  in German }{\i\lang1033 ach}{\lang1033  or Scottish }{\i\lang1033 loch}{\lang1033 , or like Cyrillic }{\i\lang1033 X}{\lang1033 . In phonetic writing, this sound is represented as [x]. But later, at the beg
inning of words, this [x] was weakened and became a sound like English }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033 . In LotR Appendix E, Tolkien informs us that the Tengwa letter for [x] was originally called }{\b\lang1033 harma}{\lang1033 
; naturally this Tengwa was so called because the initial }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033  of this word was an example of the sound the letter denoted, [x]. But when [x] in this position eventually turned into an English-style }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033 
, the Tengwa was renamed }{\b\lang1033 aha}{\lang1033 , for in the middle of words, [x] was not weakened. So we can extract these rules: at the }{\i\lang1033 beginning of words}{\lang1033  (before a vowel), the letter }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033 
 is to be pronounced like English }{\i\lang1033 h}{\lang1033 . But in the }{\i\lang1033 middle}{\lang1033  of words, }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033  is to be pronounced [x]: as between vowels in }{\b\lang1033 aha}{\lang1033  "wrath", and likewise before }{
\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  in words like }{\b\lang1033 pahta}{\lang1033  "closed", }{\b\lang1033 ohta}{\lang1033  "war", }{\b\lang1033 nuhta}{\lang1033 - "to stunt". 
\par In one late source, Tolkien noted that "in Quenya and Telerin medial [x] eventually became }{\i\lang1033 h}{\lang1033  also in most cases" (VT41:9). It may therefore be permissible to pronounce even words like }{\b\lang1033 aha}{\lang1033 
 with an English-style breath-}{\i\lang1033 h}{\lang1033 . But the group }{\b\lang1033 ht}{\lang1033  must probably always be pronounced [xt]; the weaker breath-}{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033  would be barely audible in this position.}{\i\lang1033 
\par }{\lang1033 This rule needs one modification. Likely, }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033  before }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  was originally pronounced [x] in all cases. Following any of the vowels }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033 , and }{
\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 , this pronunciation persisted, as in the examples }{\b\lang1033 pahta}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ohta}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 nuhta}{\lang1033 - above. But following the vowels }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 e}{
\lang1033 , the original [x] turned into a sound similar to}{\b\lang1033  }{\lang1033 German }{\i\lang1033 ich}{\lang1033 -Laut (German may indeed be Tolkien's inspiration for this particular development in Quenya phonology). Thus in words like }{
\b\lang1033 eht\'eb}{\lang1033  "spear" or }{\b\lang1033 rihta}{\lang1033 - "to jerk", }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033  should be pronounced just like the }{\b\lang1033 hy}{\lang1033 
 described above. Again, Tolkien imagined that human (mortal) speakers of Westron had a tendency to substitute a sound like English }{\i\lang1033 sh}{\lang1033  and say "esht\'eb", "rishta" instead.
\par \'a4 Quenya }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033  "represents more or less the sound of English initial }{\i\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 , as in }{\i\lang1033 let}{\lang1033 " (LotR Appendix E). Now why did Tolkien specify that Quenya }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 
 is to sound like an }{\i\lang1033 initial}{\lang1033  English }{\b\lang1033 l }{\lang1033 (regardless of its position in a Quenya word)? As Tolkien was well aware, British English }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033  is pronounced somewha
t differently in different positions. An }{\i\lang1033 initial}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 , as in }{\i\lang1033 let}{\lang1033 , is pronounced as a so-called "clear" }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033  \endash  and this is the kind of }{\b\lang1033 l}
{\lang1033  that should be used in }{\i\lang1033 all}{\lang1033  positions in Quenya (as is also the case in other languages, like German). But when }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033  is not initial, English in most cases employs a so-called "dark" }{
\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 , which differs from the the "clear" }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033  in that the "dark" variant is pronounced by arching the back of the tongue upwards: Contrast the pronunciation of }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033  in two words like }{
\i\lang1033 let}{\lang1033  (clear }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 ) and }{\i\lang1033 fill}{\lang1033  (dark }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 ). Compared to the "clear" }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 , the "dark" }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 
 sounds lower pitched, but this sound is to be avoided in Quenya. This may be something of a problem to Americans, since their L's tend to be rather "dark" in all positions, even initially (at least as perceived by European ears). \endash 
 Perfectionists should also observe another detail: In Letters:425, Tolkien mentioned }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033  among the Quenya "dentals", sc. sounds that are pronounced with the tip of the tongue touching the (upper) teeth. English normally uses an }{
\i\lang1033 alveolar}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033  
instead, that is, a sound pronounced with the tip of the tongue further back, above the teeth rather than touching them. This again makes for a somewhat "darker" sound. When pronouncing a Quenya }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 
, one should make sure that that the tip of the tongue touches the teeth.}{\i\lang1033 
\par }{\lang1033 \'a4 Quenya }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  is like English }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 . Usually this sound had been }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  all along, but in some cases it represents older }{\b\lang1033 ng}{\lang1033  as in English }{
\i\lang1033 king}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 ding}{\lang1033  (notice that there is no distinct }{\i\lang1033 g}{\lang1033  to be heard, despite the spelling). Unlike English, Quenya could also
 have this sound at the beginning of words. As mentioned in the discussion of spelling conventions, Tolkien sometimes used the letter }{\b\lang1033 \'f1}{\lang1033  to represent this older }{\b\lang1033 ng}{\lang1033 , e.g. }{\b\lang1033 \'d1oldor}{
\lang1033 . In his letters, Tolkien in one case added a footnote to the word }{\b\lang1033 Noldor}{\lang1033  (so spelt), informing the recipient that the initial }{\i\lang1033 N}{\lang1033  was to be pronounced "ng as in }{\i\lang1033 ding}{\lang1033 " (
}{\i\lang1033 Letters}{\lang1033 :176). This would however be the "archaic" pronunciation; people speaking Quenya in Frodo's day would simply say }{\b\lang1033 Noldor}{\lang1033 : LotR Appendix E clearly indicates that by the Third Age, initial }{
\b\lang1033 \'f1}{\lang1033  had come to be pronounced like a normal }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 , and therefore the Elvish letter for }{\b\lang1033 \'f1}{\lang1033  "has been transcribed }{\i\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 
". We have adopted the same system here, so the letter }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  in nearly all cases represents normal English }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 , regardless of its phonological history in Quenya. I say "in nearly all cases" because }{
\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  is still pronounced }{\b\lang1033 \'f1}{\lang1033  before }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033  (= }{\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033 ), }{\b\lang1033 g}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 qu}{\lang1033 
. This is not much of a problem, for it is natural for speakers of English and many other languages to use this pronunciation anyway. In a word like }{\b\lang1033 anca}{\lang1033  "jaw" the cluster }{\b\lang1033 nc}{\lang1033 
 is therefore pronounced like "nk" in English }{\i\lang1033 tank}{\lang1033 , and in a word like }{\b\lang1033 anga}{\lang1033  "iron" the }{\b\lang1033 ng}{\lang1033  should be sounded like "ng" in English }{\i\lang1033 finger}{\lang1033 
. Notice that Quenya }{\b\lang1033 ng}{\lang1033  occurring in the middle of words should always be pronounced }{\i\lang1033 with an audible }{\b\i\lang1033 g}{\lang1033  (this also goes for the group }{\b\lang1033 ngw}{\lang1033 , as in }{\b\lang1033 
tengwa}{\lang1033  "letter"). It is NOT just the simple }{\i\lang1033 \'f1}{\lang1033  described above, the "ng" of English }{\i\lang1033 king}{\lang1033 , with no distinct }{\i\lang1033 g}{\lang1033 . (We are of course talking about a hard }{\i\lang1033 
g}{\lang1033  here; Quenya }{\b\lang1033 ng}{\lang1033  must never be pronounced "nj" as in English }{\i\lang1033 a}{\b\i\lang1033 ng}{\i\lang1033 el}{\lang1033 , but always as in }{\i\lang1033 fi}{\b\i\lang1033 ng}{\i\lang1033 er}{\lang1033 
. The sound of "soft" }{\i\lang1033 g}{\lang1033  as in English }{\b\i\lang1033 g}{\i\lang1033 in}{\lang1033  does not occur in Quenya.)
\par \'a4 Quenya }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  "represents a trilled }{\i\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  in all positions; the sound was not lost before consonants (as in [British] English }{\i\lang1033 part}{\lang1033 )" (LotR Appendix E). English }{\b\lang1033 r}{
\lang1033  is generally much too weak for Quenya. Its weakness is precisely the reason why it tends to drop out before consonants and at the end of words (except where the }{\i\lang1033 next}{\lang1033  word happens to begin in a vowel \endash 
 and by analogy, some speakers of English even introduce an R-sound where a word that properly }{\i\lang1033 should}{\lang1033  end in a vowel comes before a word beginning in a vowel. That is when }{\i\lang1033 vanilla ice}{\lang1033 
 starts coming out as "vanillar ice" \endash  or, if you like, "vanilla rice"! Of course, this must be avoided in Quenya.) Quenya }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  should be }{\i\lang1033 trilled}{\lang1033 
, as in Spanish, Italian, Russian etc., or for that matter as in Scottish English. Certain subtleties of Tengwar spelling suggests that in Quenya, }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 
 was somewhat weaker immediately in front of consonants (as opposed to vowels) and at the end of words. Nonetheless, it should be a properly trilled, wholly distinct sound even in these positions: }{\b\lang1033 Parma}{\lang1033  "book", }{\b\lang1033 erd
\'eb}{\lang1033  "seed", }{\b\lang1033 tasar}{\lang1033  "willow", }{\b\lang1033 Eldar}{\lang1033  "Elves". The vowel in front of }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  should not be lengthened or otherwise affected. In the Jackson mov
ie, the actors portraying Gandalf and Saruman normally pronounce the name }{\b\lang1033 Mordor}{\lang1033  correctly, with trilled }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 's and short vowels (whereas Elijah Wood's "Frodo" invariably says }{\i\lang1033 M\'f3d\'f3}{
\lang1033  with no trace of any }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 's!) In the movie, }{\b\lang1033 Mordor}{\lang1033  is Sindarin for Black Land, but by its form and pronunciation, the word could just as well be Quenya }{\b\lang1033 mordor}{\lang1033 
 = "shadows" or "stains" (the plural form of }{\b\lang1033 mordo}{\lang1033 ).
\par  The }{\i\lang1033 uvular}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  that is common in languages like French and German should be avoided in Quenya, for LotR Appendix E states that 
this was "a sound which the Eldar found distasteful" (it is even suggested that this was how the Orcs pronounced R!)
\par \'a4 The consonant }{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  should always be unvoiced, "as in English }{\i\lang1033 so}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 geese}{\lang1033 " (LotR Appendix E). In English, }{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  is often voiced to }{\b\lang1033 z}{
\lang1033 , even though orthography may still show "s". For instance, though the }{\i\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  of English }{\i\lang1033 house}{\lang1033  is unvoiced, it becomes voiced in the plural form }{\i\lang1033 houses}{\lang1033 
 (for this reason, Tolkien noted that he would have liked the spelling }{\i\lang1033 houzes}{\lang1033  better \endash  see PM:24). When pronouncing Quenya, one should be careful not to add voice to }{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 , turning it into }{
\b\lang1033 z}{\lang1033 : }{\b\lang1033 Asar}{\lang1033  "festival", }{\b\lang1033 olos}{\lang1033  "dream", }{\b\lang1033 naus\'eb}{\lang1033  "imagination". Third Age Exilic Quenya did not possess the sound }{\b\lang1033 z}{\lang1033 
 at all. (Tolkien did imagine that }{\b\lang1033 z}{\lang1033  had occurred at an earlier stage, but it had later turned into }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 , merging with original }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 
. For instance, UT:396 indicates that the plural of }{\b\lang1033 olos}{\lang1033  "dream" was at one stage }{\b\lang1033 olozi}{\lang1033 , but later it became }{\b\lang1033 olori}{\lang1033 .) Where it occurs between vowels, }{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 
 often represents earlier }{\b\lang1033 \'fe}{\lang1033  (more or less = }{\i\lang1033 th}{\lang1033  as in }{\i\lang1033 thin}{\lang1033 ); the words }{\b\lang1033 asar}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 naus\'eb}{\lang1033  mentioned above represent older }{
\b\lang1033 a\'fear}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 nau\'fe\'eb}{\lang1033  and were so spelt in Tengwar orthography.
\par \'a4 On }{\b\lang1033 v}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033 : We must assume that }{\b\lang1033 v}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033  are properly pronounced as in English }{\b\i\lang1033 v}{\i\lang1033 ine}{\lang1033  and }{\b\i\lang1033 w
}{\i\lang1033 ine}{\lang1033 , respectively (but }{\i\lang1033 initial}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 nw}{\lang1033  is strictly not }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033  but simply a so-called }{\i\lang1033 labialized}{\lang1033  }{
\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 ; see below). There are some unclear points here, though. LotR Appendix E seems to indicate that in Third Age Quenya, initial }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033  had come to be pronounced }{\b\lang1033 v}{\lang1033 
: it is said that the name of the Tengwa letter }{\b\lang1033 vilya}{\lang1033  had earlier been }{\b\lang1033 wilya}{\lang1033 . Likewise, Tolkien indicated that the word }{\b\lang1033 v\'e9ra}{\lang1033  ("personal, private, own") had been }{
\b\lang1033 w\'e9ra}{\lang1033  in what he called "Old Quenya" (PM:340). In the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 , the evidence is somewhat divergent. Sometimes Tolkien has primitive stems in }{\i\lang1033 W}{\lang1033 - yield Quenya words in }{
\b\lang1033 v}{\lang1033 -, as when the stem }{\i\lang1033 WAN}{\lang1033  yields Quenya }{\b\lang1033 vanya}{\lang1033 - "go, depart, disappear". Sometimes he lists double forms, as when the stem }{\i\lang1033 W\'c2}{\lang1033  (or }{\i\lang1033 WAWA}{
\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 WAIWA}{\lang1033 ) yields Quenya }{\b\lang1033 vaiwa}{\lang1033  }{\i\lang1033 and}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 waiwa}{\lang1033 , both meaning "wind". Under the stem }{\i\lang1033 WAY}{\lang1033 
 Tolkien listed a word for "envelope" as "}{\i\lang1033 w}{\lang1033 - }{\i\lang1033 vaia}{\lang1033 ", evidently indicating a double form }{\b\lang1033 waia}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 vaia}{\lang1033 
 (all of these examples are found in LR:397). In LR:398, there are further double forms, but in the case of the verb }{\b\lang1033 vilin}{\lang1033  ("I fly") from the stem }{\i\lang1033 WIL}{\lang1033 , Tolkien curiously }{\i\lang1033 changed}{\lang1033 
 it to }{\b\lang1033 wilin}{\lang1033 . Perhaps he suddenly decided to go for the "Old Quenya" spelling rather than actually rejecting one in favour of the other?
\par The weight of the evidence seems to be that at the beginning of words, }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033 - had come to be pronounced as normal }{\b\lang1033 v}{\lang1033 - by the Third Age; where Tolkien listed double forms in }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033 - and }{
\b\lang1033 v}{\lang1033 -, the former is apparently to be taken as the more archaic form. However, I have not regularized the spelling on this point, though where}{\i\lang1033  Tolkien himself}{\lang1033  used or listed a form in }{\b\lang1033 v}{
\lang1033 - rather than }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033 - (either alone or as an alternative to }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033 -), I will use the form in }{\b\lang1033 v}{\lang1033 - in this course. (This also goes for }{\b\lang1033 vilin}{\lang1033 
!) It is possible, though, that according to the Third Age pronunciation }{\i\lang1033 all}{\lang1033  initial }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033 's should be sounded as }{\b\lang1033 v}{\lang1033 , the original distinction between initial }{\b\lang1033 v}{
\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033  having been lost in the spoken language. It is unclear whether or not Tolkien meant that this distinction was consistently upheld in Tengwar orthography (as when this writing upheld the distinction between }{
\b\lang1033 \'fe}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  even after both had come to be pronounced }{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 ). If so, the letter called (}{\b\lang1033 wilya}{\lang1033  >) }{\b\lang1033 vilya}{\lang1033  was still used for }{
\b\lang1033 v}{\lang1033  representing older }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033 , while another letter (}{\b\lang1033 vala}{\lang1033 ) was used for }{\b\lang1033 v}{\lang1033  that had been }{\b\lang1033 v}{\lang1033  all along. \endash 
 Other than at the beginning of words, the distinction between }{\b\lang1033 v}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033  was upheld even in the Third Age. In the case of the groups }{\b\lang1033 lw}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 lv}{\lang1033 
 the distinction could even be emphasized by altering the pronunciation of the latter: "For }{\i\lang1033 lv}{\lang1033 , not for }{\i\lang1033 lw}{\lang1033 , many speakers, especially Elves, used }{\i\lang1033 lb}{\lang1033 
" (LotR Appendix E). Hence a word like }{\b\lang1033 elv\'eba}{\lang1033  "starlike" would often be pronounced "elb\'eb
a", and it might also be so written in Tengwar orthography. Though frequent, this would seem to be a non-standard pronunciation, and the spellings employed by Tolkien usually indicates the pronunciation "lv". Cf. for instance }{\b\lang1033 Celvar}{
\lang1033  (or "Kelvar", meaning }{\i\lang1033 animals}{\lang1033 ) rather than }{\b\lang1033 Celbar}{\lang1033  in the speeches of Yavanna and Manw\'eb in the }{\i\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\lang1033 
, chapter 2. In PM:340 Tolkien quotes a Quenya word for "branch" as }{\b\lang1033 olba}{\lang1033  rather than }{\b\lang1033 olva}{\lang1033 , though.
\par \'a4 The letter }{\b\lang1033 y}{\lang1033  "is only used as a consonant, as }{\i\lang1033 y}{\lang1033  in E[nglish] }{\i\lang1033 Yes}{\lang1033 
": Tolkien singled this out as one of the few major departures from Latin spelling in the spelling conventions he used for Quenya (Letters:176). The }{\i\lang1033 vowel}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 y}{\lang1033 , like German }{\i\lang1033 \'fc}{\lang1033 
 or French "u" as in }{\i\lang1033 l}{\b\i\lang1033 u}{\i\lang1033 ne}{\lang1033 , does not occur in Quenya (though it is found in Sindarin).
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang1033 The question of aspiration
\par }{\lang1033 There is one uncertainty regarding the precise pronunciation the unvoiced stops }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033  (= }{\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033 ), }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 p}{\lang1033 
: In English as well as some other languages, these sounds, when occurring before a vowel at the beginning of a word, are normally }{\i\lang1033 aspirated}{\lang1033 . That is, a }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033 
-like puff of breath is slipped in after them. In this position they are pronounced a little like genuine sequences }{\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 p}{
\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033  (as in }{\i\lang1033 bac}{\b\i\lang1033 kh}{\i\lang1033 and}{\b\lang1033 ,}{\lang1033  }{\i\lang1033 ou}{\b\i\lang1033 th}{\i\lang1033 ouse}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 scra}{\b\i\lang1033 p-h}{\i\lang1033 eap}{
\lang1033 ). The average speaker is not conscious of this at all, not really perceiving the extra }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033  as a distinct sound: It is just the way }{\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 p}{\lang1033 
 is "expected" to sound at the beginning of words. But in some languages, like French, Russian and (perhaps most importantly) Finnish, there is no such gratuitous }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033  automatical
ly following these consonants when they occur in certain positions.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Should Quenya }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 p}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033 
 be aspirated as in English, or should they be pronounced as in French or Finnish? This question is not directly addressed anywhere in Tolkien's published writings. It may be observed that Quenya }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 p}{\lang1033 , }
{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033  descend from Primitive Elvish consonants that were certainly not aspirated, for in the primitive language they }{\i\lang1033 contrasted}{\lang1033  with distinct aspirated sounds: primitive }{\i\lang1033 th}{\lang1033 , }{
\i\lang1033 ph}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 kh}{\lang1033 , which later became }{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 f}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033  in Quenya. (Cf. two wholly distinct primitive words like }{\i\lang1033 thaur\'e2}{\lang1033 
 "detestable" and }{\i\lang1033 taur\'e2}{\lang1033  "masterful" \endash  the }{\i\lang1033 th}{\lang1033  of the first word should be sounded the way a speaker of English would most likely mispronounce the }{\i\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  of the latter! The }
{\i\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  of }{\i\lang1033 taur\'e2}{\lang1033  should actually be pronounced French-style, with no aspiration.) So were Quenya }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 p}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033 
 still unaspirated, since they had been so in the primitive language?
\par Since the primitive aspirated sounds had been changed, adding aspiration to }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 p}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033  would cause no confusion. It should be noted, though, that in the writing system devised by F
\'ebanor, there were originally distinct letters for aspirated sounds: "The original F\'ebanorian system also possessed a grade with extended stems, both above and below the line [of writing]. These usually represented aspirated consonants (e.g. }{
\i\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  + }{\i\lang1033 h}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 p}{\lang1033  + }{\i\lang1033 h}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 k}{\lang1033  + }{\i\lang1033 h}{\lang1033 )" (LotR Appendix E). However, these were }{\i\lang1033 not}{\lang1033 
 the letters used to spell Quenya }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 p}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033 . So all things considered, I think Quenya }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 p}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033 
 should ideally be pronounced without aspiration. For people who are used to automatically slip in a }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033 
-like puff of breath after these consonants it may be difficult to get rid of it, since they are not really conscious of its presence at all. A phonology teacher once advised me that one way of getting rid of the aspiration is to practice pronouncing }{
\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 p}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033 /}{\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033  with a burning candle in front of your mouth; the trick is to pronounce these consonants }{\i\lang1033 
without the flame of the candle flickering}{\lang1033  (because of the puff of breath that constitutes the aspiration).
\par The }{\i\lang1033 voiced}{\lang1033  counterparts of }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 p}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033 /}{\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033 , namely }{\b\lang1033 d}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 b}{\lang1033  and (hard) }{
\b\lang1033 g}{\lang1033  respectively, are not aspirated in English. For this reason, people who are used to hearing the unvoiced sounds pronounced as aspirated variants may (wrongly) perceive unaspirated unvoiced plosives as their voiced
 counterparts. Pronounced without aspiration, Quenya words like }{\b\lang1033 tarya}{\lang1033  ("stiff"), }{\b\lang1033 parma}{\lang1033  ("book") or }{\b\lang1033 calma}{\lang1033 
 ("lamp") may sound a little like "darya, barma, galma" to speakers of English (speakers of French, Russian or Finnish would not be confused). When pronouncing such words, one must }{\i\lang1033 not}{\lang1033 
 introduce vibration in the vocal chords to produce actual voiced sounds }{\b\lang1033 d}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 b}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 g}{\lang1033 . \endash 
 But I should add that the whole aspiration issue is not something a student needs to spend much time on; as I said, the exact pronunciation of Quenya }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 p}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033 
 is nowhere addressed in published writings. If it is indeed wrong to add aspiration to these consonants, at least one will err little more than Tolkien did himself when reading }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 .}{\i\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang1033 Palatalized and labialized consonants
\par }{\lang1033 In Quenya, we find words like }{\b\lang1033 nyarna}{\lang1033  "tale", }{\b\lang1033 tyali\'eb}{\lang1033  "play" or }{\b\lang1033 nwalca}{\lang1033  "cruel". From these spellings it would seem that such words begin in consonant clusters: }{
\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 y}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 y}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033 
. However, this would not agree with the explicit statement made in Lowdham's Report that "Adunaic, like Avallonian [= Quenya], does not tolerate more than a single basic consonant initially in any word" (SD:417-418). So how are we to explain this?
\par \tab The solution seems to be that "combinations" like the }{\b\lang1033 ny}{\lang1033  of }{\b\lang1033 nyarna}{\lang1033  }{\i\lang1033 are}{\lang1033  just single, basic consonants: }{\b\lang1033 Ny}{\lang1033  is not a cluster }{\b\lang1033 n}{
\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 y}{\lang1033 , but the same unitary sound that is fittingly represented as a single letter "\'f1" in Spanish orthography \endash  as in }{\i\lang1033 se\'f1or}{\lang1033 . Of course, this sounds very much like "senyor", but "
\'f1" is really a single consonant. This "\'f1" is a }{\i\lang1033 palatalized}{\lang1033  version of }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 , an }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  that has been "tinted" in the direction of }{\b\lang1033 y}{\lang1033 
. English employs one distinctly palatalized consonant, usually represented by the digraph "sh" (which, of course, is not a cluster }{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033 ); this can be described as a palatalized }{\b\lang1033 s}{
\lang1033 . By carefully comparing the pronunciation of }{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 sh}{\lang1033 
 you can perceive the palatalization mechanism operating in your own mouth: A consonant is palatalized by arching the back of the tongue up towards the roof of the mouth (the }{\i\lang1033 palate}{\lang1033 , hence the term "palatalized
 consonant"). The relationship between }{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 sh}{\lang1033  corresponds to the relationship between }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  and Quenya }{\b\lang1033 ny}{\lang1033  (or Spanish "\'f1").
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Besides }{\b\lang1033 ny}{\lang1033 , Quenya also has the palatalized consonants }{\b\lang1033 ty}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ly}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ry}{\lang1033  (e.g. in }{\b\lang1033 
tyali\'eb}{\lang1033  "play", }{\b\lang1033 alya}{\lang1033  "rich", }{\b\lang1033 verya}{\lang1033  "bold"); these are palatalized counterparts of "normal" }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 . Regarding }
{\b\lang1033 ty}{\lang1033 , Tolkien wrote that it may be pronounced as the "t" of English }{\i\lang1033 tune}{\lang1033  (see for instance SD:418-419 \endash 
 it should be noted that he is thinking of dialects where this comes out as "tyoon"; this is not the case in all forms of American English). In Gondor, some mortal speakers of Quenya supposedly pronounced }{\b\lang1033 ty}{\lang1033  like }{\i\lang1033 ch
}{\lang1033  as in English }{\b\i\lang1033 ch}{\i\lang1033 ur}{\b\i\lang1033 ch}{\lang1033 , but that was not quite the proper Elvish pronunciation. As for the consonant }{\b\lang1033 ly}{\lang1033 , it would be similar to the "lh" of Portuguese }{
\i\lang1033 o}{\b\i\lang1033 lh}{\i\lang1033 o}{\lang1033  ("eye"). In LotR Appendix E, Tolkien noted that }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033  (so spelt) should also "to some degree [be] 'palatalized' between }{\i\lang1033 e}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 i}{
\lang1033  and a consonant, or finally after }{\i\lang1033 e}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 ". The wording "to some degree" seems to suggest that we would not have a regular, "full-blown" palatalized }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 
 in these positions (like the sound spelt }{\b\lang1033 ly}{\lang1033 ), but in words like }{\b\lang1033 Eldar}{\lang1033  "Elves" or }{\b\lang1033 amil}{\lang1033  "mother", the }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 
 should ideally have just a little tint of palatalizing to it.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab Besides the palatalized consonants, we have the }{\i\lang1033 labialized}{\lang1033  consonants: }{\b\lang1033 nw}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 gw}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 qu}{\lang1033  (= }{
\b\lang1033 cw}{\lang1033 ). These are not really clusters }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 g}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033 
. Rather they represent }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 g}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033 ) pronounced with }{\i\lang1033 pouted lips}{\lang1033 , as when pronouncing }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033 
: By the pouting of the lips, the consonant is "labialized" (this word comes from the Latin term for "lip"). Quenya }{\b\lang1033 qu}{\lang1033  may certainly be pronounced as in English }{\i\lang1033 queen}{\lang1033 
, but ideally it should be pronounced as }{\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033  merged together in a single, unitary sound. (True, there does exist one early source where Tolkien states that }{\b\lang1033 qu}{\lang1033 , though }{
\i\lang1033 originally}{\lang1033  being simply }{\i\lang1033 k}{\lang1033  "accomp[anied] by lip-rounding", "is now sounded practically exactly as English }{\i\lang1033 qu}{\lang1033  \endash  a liprounded }{\i\lang1033 k}{\lang1033 
 foll[owed] by a distinct }{\i\lang1033 w}{\lang1033  sound": See }{\i\lang1033 Parma Eldalamberon}{\lang1033  #13, page 63. However, I think this idea may be superseded by information from a much la
ter source, indicating that Quenya had no initial consonant clusters: SD:417-418.) }{\b\lang1033 Nw}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 gw}{\lang1033  similarly represent "merged" versions of }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 /}{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033 , }{
\b\lang1033 g}{\lang1033 /}{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033 . \endash  It should be noted that }{\b\lang1033 nw}{\lang1033  is a single, labialized consonant only at the }{\i\lang1033 beginning}{\lang1033  of words, where it represents earlier }{\b\lang1033 ngw}
{\lang1033  (sc. what Tolkien might also spell "\'f1w", using "\'f1" for }{\i\lang1033 ng}{\lang1033  as in }{\i\lang1033 king}{\lang1033 ). In the middle of words, e.g. in }{\b\lang1033 vanwa}{\lang1033  "gone, lost", }{\b\lang1033 nw }{\lang1033 
really is a cluster }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033  and is so spelt also in Tengwar orthography. However, the labialized consonants }{\b\lang1033 qu}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 gw}{\lang1033 
 also occur in the middle of words. In fact, }{\b\lang1033 gw}{\lang1033  occurs }{\i\lang1033 only}{\lang1033  in that position, and always in the combination }{\b\lang1033 ngw}{\lang1033  (not "\'f1w" but "\'f1gw", still using "\'f1" as Tolkien did): }{
\b\lang1033 Lingw\'eb}{\lang1033  "fish", }{\b\lang1033 nangwa}{\lang1033  "jaw", }{\b\lang1033 sungwa}{\lang1033  "drinking-vessel".}{\b\lang1033 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\lang1033 The question of length:}{\lang1033  It may seem that when they occur medially between vowels, the palatalized and labialized consonants count as }{\i\lang1033 long}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 
double}{\lang1033  consonants (as if the digraphs represented actual consonant clusters after all). Again using the letter "\'f1" with its Spanish value of a palatalized }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  (and not, as Tolkien often did, for }{\i\lang1033 ng}{
\lang1033  as in }{\i\lang1033 king}{\lang1033 ), one may ask whether a word like }{\b\lang1033 atarinya}{\lang1033  ("my father", LR:61) actually represents "atari\'f1\'f1a". If so, the group }{\b\lang1033 ny}{\lang1033  in the middle of words denotes a 
}{\i\lang1033 long palatalized N}{\lang1033 . Then the very word }{\b\lang1033 Quenya}{\lang1033  would be pronounced "Que\'f1\'f1a" rather than "Quen-ya". Another possibility is "Que\'f1ya", the }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 
 being palatalized all right, but there is still a relatively distinct }{\b\lang1033 y}{\lang1033 -sound following it (which there would not be when }{\b\lang1033 ny}{\lang1033  occurs at the beginning of a word). Tolkien reading a version of }{
\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  at least once pronounced the word }{\b\lang1033 inyar}{\lang1033  as "i\'f1\'f1ar" (but the second time it occurred he simply said "inyar" with }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 y}{\lang1033 
). In any case, the groups }{\b\lang1033 ny}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ly}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ry}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ty}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 qu}{\lang1033  (for }{\b\lang1033 cw}{\lang1033 
) must be counted as either long consonants or consonant clusters for the purpose of stress (see below) \endash  though it is also clear that sometimes they must be analyzed as single, unitary consonants.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang1033 Stress 
\par }{\lang1033 Whenever a language has polysyllabic words, speakers of this language may enunciate some syllables more forcefully than others. We say that these syllables are }{\i\lang1033 stressed}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 accented}{\lang1033 
. In some languages speakers don't normally emphasize certain syllables more than others. For instance, the Japanese put about the same amount of stress on every syllable, resulti
ng in what unloving foreigners have referred to as "machine gun articulation". But in Western languages, a }{\i\lang1033 varying}{\lang1033  amount of stress is common: Some syllables are stressed, others unstressed.
\par \tab The rules for }{\i\lang1033 which}{\lang1033  syllables are stressed vary wildly, though. Some languages have a very simple system; in French, words that are to receive any stress are always accented on the }{\i\lang1033 final}{\lang1033 
 syllable. To the natives, Paris is not "}{\i\lang1033 PAR}{\lang1033 is" as in English, but rather "par}{\i\lang1033 IS}{\lang1033 " (actually the French don't pronounce the }{\i\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 , but that
 has nothing to do with the accent). The Finns also have a very simple system, stressing all words on the }{\i\lang1033 first}{\lang1033  syllable: While some speakers of English may think that Helsinki is most "naturally" pronounced "Hel}{\i\lang1033 
SINK}{\lang1033 i", the residents of the city will insist on "}{\i\lang1033 HEL}{\lang1033 sinki" instead.
\par \tab Since the Finnish language was evidently Tolkien's foremost inspiration, one might think that he would have copied its simple system of accenting all words on the first syllable over into Quenya. In the "internal" or fictional his
tory of the language, he did indeed envision an early period during which Quenya words were so accented (the so-called }{\i\lang1033 retraction period}{\lang1033 
, WJ:366). However, this was replaced by a new system already before the Noldor went into exile, so Quenya as a language
 of lore in Middle-earth employed different accentuation patterns, carefully described in LotR Appendix E. This is the system we must use. (It seems that Tolkien actually copied it from Latin!)
\par \tab Words of one syllable, like }{\b\lang1033 nat}{\lang1033  "thing", obviously pose no problem; this one syllable is the sole candidate for receiving the stress. The simplest polysyllabic words, those of }{\i\lang1033 two}{\lang1033 
 syllables, are no problem either: In LotR Appendix E, Tolkien noted that "in words of two syllables [the accent] falls in practically all
 cases on the first syllable". As this wording implies, there may be a very few exceptions; the only exception known seems to be the word }{\b\lang1033 av\'e1}{\lang1033  "don't!", that is accented on the final syllable: "a}{\i\lang1033 V\'c1}{\lang1033 
". (Even this one word also appears in the alternative form }{\b\lang1033 \'e1va}{\lang1033 , stressed on the first syllable according to the normal rule: "}{\i\lang1033 \'c1V}{\lang1033 a".) The name of the Blessed Realm, }{\b\lang1033 Aman}{\lang1033 
, I sometimes hear people pronounce with the stress on the second rather than the first syllable \endash  but the correct pronunciation must be "}{\i\lang1033 AM}{\lang1033 an", if we can trust the rules set out by Tolkien. ("Am}{\i\lang1033 AN}{
\lang1033 " would be Amman, capital of Jordan!)
\par \tab Longer words, with three or more syllables, are slightly more complex when it comes to stress. Many of them are accented on the }{\i\lang1033 second to last}{\lang1033  syllable. However, in so
me cases the second-to-last syllable isn't "qualified" to receive the accent: This syllable cannot be accented if it is }{\i\lang1033 short}{\lang1033 . So how do we recognize a short syllable? If it contains no }{\i\lang1033 long}{\lang1033 
 vowel (no vowel marked with an accent), this is obviously one omen. Then the vowel itself is necessarily short. If this short vowel is followed by }{\i\lang1033 only one}{\lang1033  }{\i\lang1033 consonant}{\lang1033 , or even}{\i\lang1033 
 no consonant at all}{\lang1033 , this syllable has little chance of receiving the accent. Its one remaining chance of redeeming itself as a long syllable is that instead of a simple short vowel it actually contains one of the Quenya }{\i\lang1033 
diphthongs}{\lang1033 : }{\b\lang1033 ai}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 au}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 eu}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 oi}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ui}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 iu}{\lang1033 
. Two vowels combined into a diphthong count as having the same "length" as a normal, unitary long vowel (marked by an accent). But if there is n
o diphthong, no long vowel, and not even a short vowel followed by more than one consonant, the syllable in question is irredeemably }{\i\lang1033 short}{\lang1033 
. If this is the second-to-last syllable in a word of three or more syllables, this penultimate syllable has forfeited all its chances to receive the stress. In such a case the stress moves one step ahead, to fall on the }{\i\lang1033 third}{\lang1033 
 syllable from the end (no matter what }{\i\lang1033 this}{\lang1033  syllable looks like). Tolkien noted that words of such a shape "are favoured in the Eldarin languages, especially Quenya". Examples:
\par \tab \'a4 A word like }{\b\lang1033 vestal\'eb}{\lang1033  "wedding" is accented "}{\i\lang1033 VEST}{\lang1033 al\'eb". The second-to-last syllable cannot receive the stress because its vowel (the }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 
) is short and followed by only a single consonant (the }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 ); hence the accent moves one step ahead, to the third syllable from the end. Plural forms like }{\b\lang1033 Teleri}{\lang1033  (the Sea-Elves) and }{\b\lang1033 Istari}{
\lang1033  (the Wizards) I sometimes hear people mispronounce as "Te}{\i\lang1033 LER}{\lang1033 i", "Is}{\i\lang1033 TAR}{\lang1033 i"; applying Tolkien's rules we have to conclude that he actually intended "}{\i\lang1033 TEL}{\lang1033 eri", "}{
\i\lang1033 IST}{\lang1033 ari". The short penultimate syllables in these words cannot be accented.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \'a4 A word like }{\b\lang1033 Eress\'eba}{\lang1033 
 (the name of an isle near the Blessed Realm) some speakers of English are tempted to accent on the second-to-last syllable (following the stress-pattern of such a place-name as "Eritrea"!) But since in }{\b\lang1033 Er-ess-\'eb-a}{\lang1033 
 the second-to-last syllable is just a short }{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  not followed by a group of consonants (actually not even }{\i\lang1033 one}{\lang1033 
 consonant), this syllable cannot be accented and the stress moves to the syllable before it: "Er}{\i\lang1033 ESS}{\lang1033 \'eba". Other words of the same pattern (with no consonant following a short vowel in the second-to-last syllable): }{
\b\lang1033 Eldali\'eb}{\lang1033  "the people of the Elves" ("El}{\i\lang1033 DA}{\lang1033 li\'eb" \endash  though the word }{\b\lang1033 Elda}{\lang1033  "Elf" by itself is of course accented "}{\i\lang1033 EL}{\lang1033 da"), }{\b\lang1033 Tilion}{
\lang1033  "The Horned", name of a Maia ("}{\i\lang1033 TIL}{\lang1033 ion"), }{\b\lang1033 laur\'eba}{\lang1033  "golden" ("}{\i\lang1033 LAUR}{\lang1033 \'eba"), }{\b\lang1033 Yavanni\'eb}{\lang1033  "September" ("Ya}{\i\lang1033 VANN}{\lang1033 i\'eb
"), }{\b\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\lang1033  "[The Story] of the Silmarils" ("Silma}{\i\lang1033 RILL}{\lang1033 ion").
\par But though such words were "favoured", there is certainly no lack of words where the second-to-last syllable does qualify for receiving the accent. Examples: 
\par \'a4 Varda's title }{\b\lang1033 Elent\'e1ri}{\lang1033  "Star-Queen" is pronounced "Elen}{\i\lang1033 T\'c1R}{\lang1033 i", since the vowel }{\b\lang1033 \'e1}{\lang1033  in the second-to-last syllable is }{\i\lang1033 long}{\lang1033 
. (If this had been a short }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 , it couldn't have been stressed since it is not followed by more than one consonant, and the third syllable from the end would have been accented instead: "E}{\i\lang1033 LEN}{\lang1033 tari" 
\endash  but no such word exists.) The names }{\b\lang1033 N\'famen\'f3r\'eb}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 Valin\'f3r\'eb}{\lang1033  are likewise accented on the long }{\b\lang1033 \'f3}{\lang1033  in the second-to-last syllable (whereas in the shortened
 forms }{\b\lang1033 N\'famenor}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 Valinor}{\lang1033  the accent must fall on the third syllable from the end: }{\i\lang1033 N\'daMenor}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 VALinor}{\lang1033 ).
\par \'a4 Words like }{\b\lang1033 hastaina}{\lang1033  "marred" or }{\b\lang1033 Valarauco}{\lang1033  "Power-demon" (Sindarin }{\i\lang1033 Balrog}{\lang1033 ) are accented "has}{\i\lang1033 TAIN}{\lang1033 a", "Vala}{\i\lang1033 RAUC}{\lang1033 o" \endash 
 since diphthongs like }{\b\lang1033 ai}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 au}{\lang1033  can be counted as long vowels for the purpose of stress.
\par \'a4 The names }{\b\lang1033 Elendil}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 Isildur}{\lang1033  are accented "El}{\i\lang1033 END}{\lang1033 il" and "Is}{\i\lang1033 ILD}{\lang1033 
ur", since the vowel in the second-to-last-syllable, though short, is followed by more than one consonant (the groups }{\b\lang1033 nd}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ld}{\lang1033 , respectively). A dou
ble consonant would have the same effect as a cluster of different consonants; for instance, }{\b\lang1033 Elenna}{\lang1033  ("Starwards", a name of N\'famenor) is pronounced "El}{\i\lang1033 ENN}{\lang1033 a". (Contrast the adjective }{\b\lang1033 elena
}{\lang1033  "stellar, of the stars": this must be accented "}{\i\lang1033 EL}{\lang1033 ena" since the second-to-last syllable "}{\b\lang1033 en}{\lang1033 " is short and therefore unable to receive the accent \endash  unlike the long syllable "}{
\b\lang1033 enn}{\lang1033 " in }{\b\lang1033 Elenna}{\lang1033 .)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par Notice that the one letter }{\b\lang1033 x}{\lang1033  represents two consonants, }{\b\lang1033 ks}{\lang1033 . Therefore, a word like }{\b\lang1033 Helcarax\'eb}{\lang1033  (a place-name) is accented "Helcar}{\i\lang1033 AX}{\lang1033 \'eb" (not "Hel}{
\i\lang1033 CAR}{\lang1033 ax\'eb" as if there were only one consonant following the }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  in the second-to-last syllable). Cf. the alternative spelling }{\b\lang1033 Helkarakse}{\lang1033  in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{
\lang1033 , entry }{\i\lang1033 KARAK}{\lang1033 .
\par 
\par As noted above, some combinations should apparently be thought of as single consonants: }{\b\lang1033 qu}{\lang1033  (for }{\b\lang1033 cw}{\lang1033 /}{\b\lang1033 kw}{\lang1033 ) represents }{\i\lang1033 labialized}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 k}{
\lang1033 , not }{\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033 . Similarly, }{\b\lang1033 ny}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ty}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ly}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ry}{\lang1033  would be }{\i\lang1033 palatalized}{\lang1033  }{
\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  (the first = Spanish }{\i\lang1033 \'f1}{\lang1033 ). But in the middle of words, for the purpose of stress, it seems that }{\b\lang1033 qu}{
\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ly}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ny}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ty}{\lang1033  etc. do count as groups of consonants (double consonants or clusters \endash 
 we cannot be certain precisely what Tolkien intended). In WJ:407, Tolkien indicates that the compound word }{\b\lang1033 ciryaquen}{\lang1033  "shipman, sailor" (made from }{\b\lang1033 cirya}{\lang1033  "ship" + -}{\b\lang1033 quen}{\lang1033 
 "person") is to be accented "cir}{\i\lang1033 YA}{\lang1033 quen". If }{\b\lang1033 qu}{\lang1033  (= }{\b\lang1033 cw}{\lang1033 /}{\b\lang1033 kw}{\lang1033 ) were here thought of as a single consonant, labialized }{\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033 
, there would not be a group of consonants following the }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  and it could not receive the accent: the word would then have been pronounced "}{\i\lang1033 CIR}{\lang1033 yaquen" instead. So either }{\b\lang1033 qu}{\lang1033 
 here does count as a cluster }{\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033 , or it represents a }{\i\lang1033 long}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 double}{\lang1033  labialized }{\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033  (or even labialized }{\b\lang1033 kw}{
\lang1033  followed by }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033 ). Bottom line is: pronounce "cir}{\i\lang1033 YA}{\lang1033 quen" and be relieved that the rest is mainly academic meandering. A few other words including the combinations in question: }{\b\lang1033 
Elenya}{\lang1033  (first day of the Eldarin six-day week, accented "El}{\i\lang1033 EN}{\lang1033 ya"), }{\b\lang1033 Calacirya}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 Calacilya}{\lang1033  (a place in the Blessed Realm, accented "Cala}{\i\lang1033 CI}{\lang1033 
rya", "Cala}{\i\lang1033 CI}{\lang1033 lya").
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\lang1033 A word of warning regarding the accent mark: }{\lang1033 Notice that the accent mark that may appear above vowels (}{\b\lang1033 \'e1}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 \'e9}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 
\'ed}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 \'f3}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 \'fa}{\lang1033 ) }{\i\lang1033 only}{\lang1033 
 denotes that the vowel is long. While this symbol is frequently used to indicate the stressed syllable, this is not the case in Tolkien's normal spelling of Quenya. (Some may have noted that }{\i\lang1033 Pok\'e9mon}{\lang1033  isn't accented on the }{
\i\lang1033 \'e9}{\lang1033  either, so Tolkien isn't wildly idiosyncratic in this department!) A long vowel will }{\i\lang1033 often}{\lang1033  receive the stress, as in the example }{\b\lang1033 Elent\'e1ri}{\lang1033 
 above, but not necessarily so: If the long vowel does not appear in the second-to-last syllable, its length (and the accent mark denoting it!) is quite irrelevant for the purpose of stress. In a word like }{\b\lang1033 \'dalairi}{\lang1033 
, the Quenya name for the Ringwraiths or Nazg\'fbl, the stress falls on the diphthong }{\b\lang1033 ai}{\lang1033 , not on the }{\b\lang1033 \'fa}{\lang1033 . The spelling }{\b\lang1033 palant\'edr}{\lang1033 
 has mislead many, making them think that this word is to be accented on "t\'edr". }{\lang1033\cgrid0 Here is something Ian McKellen, playing Gandalf in the Peter Jackson LotR movie trilogy, wrote as the film was being shot:
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033\cgrid0 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033\cgrid0 ...I have to learn a new pronunciation. All this time we have being
\par saying "palanT\'cdR" instead of the Old English stress on the first syllable.
\par }\pard \li708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033\cgrid0 Just as the word was about to be committed to the soundtrack, a correction came from Andrew Jack, the Dialect Coach; he taught me a Norfolk accent for }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 Restoration}{
\lang1033\cgrid0 , and for LOTR he supervises accents, languages and all things vocal. }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 Palant\'edr}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
, being strictly of elvish origin should follow Tolkien's rule that the syllable before a double consonant should be stressed \endash  "paLANT\'edr" making a sound which is close to "lantern"...
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033\cgrid0 
\par Andrew Jack was right. }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 Palant\'edr}{\lang1033\cgrid0  cannot be stressed on the final syllable; virtually no polysyllabic Quenya words are accented in such a way (as I said above, }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 av\'e1}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 "don't!" is the sole known exception). Instead the }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 a}{\lang1033\cgrid0  in the second-to-last syllable receives the accent because it is followed by the consonant cluster }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 nt}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 (I should not call this a "double consonant" like McKellen does, since I want to reserve that term for a group of two }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 identical}{\lang1033\cgrid0  consonants, like }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 tt}{\lang1033\cgrid0  or }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 nn
}{\lang1033\cgrid0  \endash  but for the purpose of stress, double consonants and clusters of different consonants have the same effect). So it is indeed "pal}{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 ANT}{\lang1033\cgrid0 \'edr". (But in the plural form }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 
palant\'edri}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , where the long }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 \'ed}{\lang1033\cgrid0  suddenly appears in the second-to-last syllable, it does receive the accent: "palan}{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 T\'cdR}{\lang1033\cgrid0 i".)
\par 
\par In the case of long words ending in two short syllables, the last of these syllables may receive a weaker }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 secondary stress}{\lang1033\cgrid0 . In a word like }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 h\'edsim\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 "mist", the main stress falls on }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 h\'eds}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , but the final syllable -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 m\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0  is not wholly unstressed. This secondary stress is much weaker than the main accent, though. (Nonethel
ess, Tolkien did note that for the purpose of poetry, the secondary stress can be used metrically: RGEO:69.)
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang1033 Speed
\par }{\lang1033 Finally a brief note on something we know little about: How }{\i\lang1033 fast}{\lang1033  should one talk when speaking Quenya? The few recordings of Tolkien speakin
g Quenya are not "reliable" in this matter; he inevitably enunciates quite carefully. But regarding F\'ebanor's mother }{\i\lang1033 M\'edriel}{\lang1033 
 he noted that "she spoke swiftly and took pride in this skill" (PM:333). So fast Quenya is evidently good Quenya. When Tolkien also w
rote that "the Elves made considerable use of...concomitant gestures" (WJ:416), one remembers that he had a great love for }{\i\lang1033 Italian}{\lang1033  \endash  see Letters:223.
\par 
\par }{\i\cf2\lang1033 Summary of Lesson One:}{\lang1033  The Quenya vowels are }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 
; long vowels are marked with an accent: }{\b\lang1033 \'e1}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 \'e9}{\lang1033  etc. }{\lang1033\cgrid0 The vowels should be pure, pronounced with their "Italian" values; long }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 \'e1}{\lang1033\cgrid0  and }{
\b\lang1033\cgrid0 \'e9}{\lang1033\cgrid0  should be noticably closer than short }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 a}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 e}{\lang1033\cgrid0 . Some vowels may receive a diaeresis (}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 \'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , }{
\b\lang1033\cgrid0 \'e4}{\lang1033\cgrid0  etc.), but this does not affect their pronunciation and is only intended as a clarification for people used to English orthography. The diphthongs are }{\b\lang1033 ai}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 au}{\lang1033 , }
{\b\lang1033 eu}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 oi}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ui}{\lang1033 , and }{\b\lang1033 iu}{\lang1033 . The consonant }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033  is always pronounced }{\i\lang1033 k}{\lang1033 ; }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 
 should be pronounced as a "clear", dental L; }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  should be trilled; }{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  is always unvoiced; }{\b\lang1033 y}{\lang1033  is only used as a consonant (as in English }{\i\lang1033 you}{\lang1033 
). Ideally, the consonants }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 p}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033  should probably be unaspirated. Palatalized consonants are represented by digraphs in -}{\b\lang1033 y}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 ty}{
\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ny}{\lang1033  etc.); labialized consonants are normally written as digraphs in -}{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033  (e.g. }{\b\lang1033 nw}{\lang1033 , but what would be }{\b\lang1033 cw}{\lang1033  is spelt }{\b\lang1033 qu}{\lang1033 
 instead). }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 H}{\lang1033\cgrid0  is pronounced [x] (German }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 ach-Laut}{\lang1033\cgrid0 ) before }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 t}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , unless this combination }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 ht}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 is preceded by one of the vowels }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 e}{\lang1033\cgrid0  or }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 i}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , in which case }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 h}{\lang1033\cgrid0  is sounded like German }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 ich-Laut}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
. Otherwise, }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 h}{\lang1033\cgrid0  may be pronounced like English }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 h}{\lang1033\cgrid0 ; the digraphs }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 hy}{\lang1033\cgrid0  and }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 hw}{\lang1033\cgrid0  however represent }{
\i\lang1033\cgrid0 ich-Laut}{\lang1033\cgrid0  and unvoiced }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 w}{\lang1033\cgrid0  (like American English }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 wh}{\lang1033\cgrid0 ), respectively. The combinations }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 hl}{\lang1033\cgrid0  and }{
\b\lang1033\cgrid0 hr}{\lang1033\cgrid0  originally represented unvoiced }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 l}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 r}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , but by the Third Age, these sounds had come to be pronounced like normal }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 l}
{\lang1033\cgrid0  and }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 r}{\lang1033\cgrid0 . In polysyllabic words, the }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 stress}{\lang1033\cgrid0  falls on the second-to-last syllable when that is }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 long}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 (containing either a long vowel, a diphthong, or a vowel followed by a consonant cluster or a double consonant). If the second-to-last syllable is short, the stress falls on the third syllable from the
 end (unless the word has only two syllables, in which case the first syllable receives the stress whether it is short or long).}{\lang1033 
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang1033 EXERCISES
\par }{\lang1033 As far as the most critical subtleties of pronunciation are concerned, I unfortunately cannot make any exercises; we are not in a classroom so that I can comment on your pronunciation. But regarding }{\i\lang1033 stress}{\lang1033 
 (accent) and the pronunciation of }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033 , it is possible to make exercises.
\par }{\lang1033\cgrid0 
\par }{\lang1033 1. Determine which vowel (single vowel or diphthong) receives the accent in the words below. (It is not necessary to indicate where the entire syllable it belongs to begins and ends.)
\par 
\par }{\i\lang1033 A.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Alcar}{\lang1033  ("glory")
\par }{\i\lang1033 B.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Alcar\'eb}{\lang1033  (longer variant of the above)
\par }{\i\lang1033 C.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Alcarinqua}{\lang1033  ("glorious")
\par }{\i\lang1033 D.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Calima}{\lang1033  ("bright")
\par }{\i\lang1033 E.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Oronti}{\lang1033  ("mountains")
\par }{\i\lang1033 F.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 \'dan\'f3tim\'eb}{\lang1033  ("uncountable, numberless")
\par }{\i\lang1033 G}{\lang1033 . }{\b\lang1033 Envinyatar}{\lang1033  ("renewer")
\par }{\i\lang1033 H. }{\b\lang1033 Ulund\'eb}{\lang1033  ("flood")
\par }{\i\lang1033 I.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 E\'e4ruil\'eb}{\lang1033  ("seaweed")
\par }{\i\lang1033 J.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Ercass\'eb}{\lang1033  ("holly")
\par 
\par Extra exercise on stress: While we hear many Sindarin lines in the movie, one of the few really prominent samples of Quenya in Peter Jackson's }{\i\lang1033 The Fellowship of the Ring}{\lang1033 
 is the scene where "Saruman" (Christopher Lee) standing on the top of Isengard reads an invocation to bring down an avalanche in order to stop the Fellowship. He says to the mountain they are attempting to cross: }{\b\lang1033 Nai yarvax\'eb
a rasselya taltuva notto-carinnar!}{\lang1033  = "may your bloodstained horn collapse upon enemy heads!" (not translated in the movie). The actor accents the words like this: }{\b\lang1033 nai yarVAX\'eba RASSelya TALTuva notto-CARinnar}{\lang1033 
. Are all the words accented as they should be, according to Tolkien's guidelines? If not, what is right and what is wrong?
\par 
\par 2. Where the letter }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033  appears in Quenya words as they are spelt in our letters, it may be pronounced in various ways. Ignoring the digraphs }{\b\lang1033 hw}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 hy}{\lang1033 , the letter }{\b\lang1033 h
}{\lang1033  may be pronounced
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 A) a "breath-}{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033 " like English }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033  as in }{\b\i\lang1033 h}{\i\lang1033 igh}{\lang1033 , 
\par B) more or less as in English }{\b\i\lang1033 h}{\i\lang1033 uge}{\lang1033 , }{\b\i\lang1033 h}{\i\lang1033 uman}{\lang1033  or ideally like }{\i\lang1033 ch}{\lang1033  in German }{\i\lang1033 i}{\b\i\lang1033 ch}{\lang1033 , 
\par C) like }{\i\lang1033 ch}{\lang1033  in German }{\i\lang1033 ach}{\lang1033  or Scottish }{\i\lang1033 loch}{\lang1033  (in phonetic writing [x]).
\par In addition we have alternative D): the letter }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033  is not really pronounced at all, but merely indicates that the following consonant was unvoiced in archaic Quenya.
\par Sort the words below into these four categories (A, B, C, D):
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 K.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Ohtar}{\lang1033  ("warrior")
\par }{\i\lang1033 L.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Hr\'e1v\'eb}{\lang1033  ("flesh")
\par }{\i\lang1033 M.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Nahta}{\lang1033  ("a bite")
\par }{\i\lang1033 N.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Heru}{\lang1033  ("lord")
\par }{\i\lang1033 O.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Neht\'eb}{\lang1033  ("spearhead")
\par }{\i\lang1033 P.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Mahalma }{\lang1033 ("throne")
\par }{\i\lang1033 Q.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Hell\'eb}{\lang1033  ("sky")
\par }{\i\lang1033 R. }{\b\lang1033 Tihtala}{\lang1033  ("blinking")
\par }{\i\lang1033 S.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Hl\'f3c\'eb}{\lang1033  ("snake, serpent")
\par }{\i\lang1033 T.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 H\'edsi\'eb}{\lang1033  ("mist")
\par }{\lang1033\cgrid0 
\par }{\i\lang1033 The keys to the exercises found in this course can be downloaded from this URL:}{\lang1033 
\par http://www.uib.no/People/hnohf/keys.rtf
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs36\cf6\lang1033 LESSON TWO}{\b\fs32\cf6\lang1033 
\par }{\b\fs32\lang1033 Nouns. Plural form. The article.
\par }{\lang1033 
\par Words that denote things, as opposed to for instance actions, are called }{\i\lang1033 nouns}{\lang1033 
. The "things" in question may be inanimate (like "stone"), animate (like "person", "woman", "boy"), natural (like "tree"), artificial (like "bridge, house"), concrete (lik
e "stone" again) or wholly abstract (like "hatred"). Names of persons, like "Peter" or "Mary", are also considered nouns. Sometimes a noun may denote, not one clearly distinct object or person, but an entire substance (like "gold" or "water"). So there is
 much to be included.
\par \tab In most languages, a noun can be }{\i\lang1033 inflected}{\lang1033 
, that is, it appears in various forms to modify its meaning, or to make it fit into a specific grammatical context. For instance, if you want to connect two English nouns like "Mary" and "hou
se" in such a way as to make it clear that Mary owns the house, you modify the form of the noun }{\i\lang1033 Mary}{\lang1033  by adding the ending -}{\i\lang1033 's}{\lang1033 , producing }{\i\lang1033 Mary's}{\lang1033 , which readily connects with }{
\i\lang1033 house}{\lang1033  to make the phrase }{\i\lang1033 Mary's house}{\lang1033 . Or starting with a noun like }{\i\lang1033 tree}{\lang1033 , you may w
ant to make it clear that you are talking about more than one singular tree, and so you modify the word to its plural form by adding the plural ending -}{\i\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  to get }{\i\lang1033 trees}{\lang1033 
. In English, a noun doesn't have very many forms at all; there is the singular (e.g. }{\i\lang1033 girl}{\lang1033 ), its plural (}{\i\lang1033 girls}{\lang1033 ), the form you use when the one denoted by the noun owns something (}{\i\lang1033 girl's}{
\lang1033 ) and the combination of the plural and this "ownership"-form (written }{\i\lang1033 girls'}{\lang1033  and unfortunately not really distinct from }{\i\lang1033 girls}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 girl's}{\lang1033  in sound, but speakers o
f English somehow get along without too many misunderstandings \endash  rest assured that the Quenya equivalents are clearly distinct in form!) So an English noun comes in no more than four different forms.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 A Quenya noun, on the other hand, comes in }{\i\lang1033 hundreds}{\lang1033  of different forms. It can receive endings not only for }{\i\lang1033 two}{\lang1033 
 different kinds of plural, plus endings denoting a }{\i\lang1033 pair}{\lang1033  of things, but also endings expressing meanings that in English would be denoted by placing small words like "for, in/on, from, to, of, with" et
c. in front of the noun instead. Finally a Quenya noun can also receive endings denoting who owns it, e.g. -}{\b\lang1033 rya}{\lang1033 - "her" in }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1ryat}{\lang1033  "her hands" in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  (the final -}{
\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , by the way, is one of the endings denoting a }{\i\lang1033 pair}{\lang1033  of something \endash  in this case a natural pair of hands).
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab Having read the above, the student should not succumb to the idea that Quenya is a horribly difficult language ("imagine, }{\i\lang1033 hundreds}{\lang1033 
 of different forms to learn where English has only four!"), or for that matter start thinking that Quenya mus
t be some kind of super-language ("wow, hundreds of different forms to play with while the poor English-speaking sods have to get along with a pitiful four!") English and Quenya organize the information differently, that is all \endash 
 the former often preferring a string of short words, the latter rather jumbling the ideas to be expressed into one big mouthful. The hundreds of different forms arise because a much lower number of endings can be }{\i\lang1033 combined}{\lang1033 
, so there is no reason to despair. It is a little like counting; you needn't learn two hundred and fifty different numeric symbols to be able to count to 250, but only the ten from 0 to 9.
\par \tab }{\lang1033\cgrid0 Most of the endings a noun can take we won't discuss until
\par  (much) later lessons. }{\lang1033 We will start with something that should be familiar enough, found even on the puny list of English noun-forms: Making a noun plural \endash  going from one to several.
\par \tab In Quenya, there are two different plurals. One is formed by adding the ending -}{\b\lang1033 li}{\lang1033  to the noun. Tolkien called this the "partitive plural" (WJ:388) or a "general pl[ural]" (see the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 
, entry }{\i\lang1033 TELES}{\lang1033 ). Unfortunately, the function of this plural \endash  sc. how it differs in meaning from the more "normal" plural discussed below \endash  is not fully understood. We have a few examples of this plural
 in our scarce source material, but they are not very helpful. For a long time it was assumed that this plural implied that there were "many" of the things in question; hence }{\b\lang1033 Eldali}{\lang1033  (formed from }{\b\lang1033 Elda}{\lang1033 
 "Elf") would mean something like "many Elves". There may be something to this, but in several of the examples we have, there seems to be no implication of "many". It has been suggested that }{\b\lang1033 Eldali}{\lang1033 
 may rather mean something like "several Elves" or "some Elves", sc. some out of a larger group, }{\i\lang1033 some}{\lang1033  considered as }{\i\lang1033 part}{\lang1033 
 of this group: The term "partitive plural" may point in the same direction. However, I will for the most part leave the partitive plural alone throughout this course. Its function just isn't well enough understood for me to construct exercises that wo
uld only mean feeding some highly tentative interpretation to unsuspecting students. (I present some thoughts about the -}{\b\lang1033 li }{\lang1033 plural in the appendices to this course.)
\par \tab For now we will deal with the "normal" plural form instead. Any reader of Tolkien's narratives will have encountered plenty of examples of this form; they are especially common in the }{\i\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\lang1033 
. Nouns ending in any of the four vowels -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  , plus nouns ending in the group -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033 
, form their plural with the ending -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 . Cf. the names of various groups of people mentioned in the }{\i\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\lang1033 :
\par 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\lang1033 Elda}{\lang1033  "Elf", plural }{\b\cf1\lang1033 Eldar}{\cf1\lang1033 
\par }{\b\cf1\lang1033 Vala}{\cf1\lang1033  "god (or technically angel)", pl. }{\b\cf1\lang1033 Valar
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\cf1\lang1033 \tab }{\b\cf1\lang1033 Ainu}{\cf1\lang1033  "spirit of God's first creation", pl. }{\b\cf1\lang1033 Ainur}{\cf1\lang1033 
\par \tab }{\b\cf1\lang1033 Noldo}{\cf1\lang1033  "Noldo, member of the Second Clan of the Eldar", pl. }{\b\cf1\lang1033 Noldor
\par \tab Vali\'eb}{\cf1\lang1033  "female Vala", pl. }{\b\cf1\lang1033 Valier}{\lang1033 
\par 
\par For another example of -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033 , cf. }{\b\lang1033 tier}{\lang1033  for "paths" in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 ; compare singular }{\b\lang1033 ti\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "path". (According to the spelling conventions here employed, the diaeresis in }{\b\lang1033 ti\'eb}{\lang1033  is dropped in the plural form }{\b\lang1033 tier}{\lang1033  because the dots are there merely to mark that final -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{
\lang1033  is not silent, but in }{\b\lang1033 tier}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033  is not final anymore because an ending has been added \endash  and hence the dots go.) Examples of the plurals of nouns in -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 
 are rare, since nouns with this ending are rare themselves, but in MR:229 we have }{\b\lang1033 quendir}{\lang1033  as the pl. of }{\b\lang1033 quendi}{\lang1033  "Elf-woman" (and also }{\b\lang1033 quendur}{\lang1033  as the pl. of }{\b\lang1033 quendu}
{\lang1033  "Elf-man"; nouns in -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  are not very numerous either).
\par 
\par This singular word }{\b\lang1033 quendi}{\lang1033  "Elf-woman" must not be confused with the }{\i\lang1033 plural}{\lang1033  word }{\b\lang1033 Quendi}{\lang1033  that many readers of Tolkien's fiction will remember from the }{\i\lang1033 Silmarillion}{
\lang1033 , for instance in the description of the awakening of the Elves in chapter 3: "Themselves they named the Quendi, signifying those that speak with voices; for as yet they had met no other living things that spoke or sang." }{\b\lang1033 Quendi}{
\lang1033  is the plural form of }{\b\lang1033 Quend\'eb}{\lang1033  "Elf"; nouns ending in -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  typically form their plurals in -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 , and as we see, this -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  replaces the final -
}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  instead of being added to it. In WJ:361, Tolkien explicitly refers to "nouns in -}{\i\lang1033 e}{\lang1033 , the majority of which formed their plurals in -}{\i\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 ". 
\par 
\par As this wording implies, there are exceptions; a few nouns in -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  are seen to use the other plural ending, -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 , instead. One exception we have already touched on: where the -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{
\lang1033  is part of -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033 , we have plurals in -}{\b\lang1033 ier}{\lang1033 , as in }{\b\lang1033 tier}{\lang1033  "paths". Hence we avoid the awkward plural form **}{\b\lang1033 tii}{\lang1033 
. Other exceptions cannot be explained as easily. In LotR Appendix E, we have }{\b\lang1033 tyeller}{\lang1033  for "grades", evidently the plural of }{\b\lang1033 tyell\'eb}{\lang1033 .  Why }{\b\lang1033 tyeller}{\lang1033  instead of **}{\b\lang1033 
tyelli}{\lang1033 ? LR:47 likewise indicates that the plural of }{\b\lang1033 mall\'eb}{\lang1033  "road" is }{\b\lang1033 maller}{\lang1033 ; why not **}{\b\lang1033 malli}{\lang1033 ? It may be that nouns in -}{\b\lang1033 l\'eb}{\lang1033 
 have plurals in -}{\b\lang1033 ler}{\lang1033  because "regular" **-}{\b\lang1033 li}{\lang1033  might cause confusion with the partitive plural ending -}{\b\lang1033 li}{\lang1033 
 mentioned above. Unfortunately, we lack more examples that could confirm or disprove this theory (and so I don't dare to construct any exercises based on this assumption, though I would follow this rule in my own Quenya compositions). The form }{
\b\lang1033 tyeller}{\lang1033  confused early researchers; with extremely few examples to go on, some wrongly concluded that nouns in -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  }{\i\lang1033 regularly}{\lang1033  have plurals in -}{\b\lang1033 er}{\lang1033 
. The name of the early journal }{\b\lang1033 Parma Eldalamberon}{\lang1033  or "Book of Elven-tongues" (sporadically published still) reflects this mistake; the title incorporates **}{\b\lang1033 lamber}{\lang1033  as the presumed plural of }{
\b\lang1033 lamb\'eb}{\lang1033  "tongue, language", while we now know that the correct plural must be }{\b\lang1033 lambi}{\lang1033 
. Though the error was early suspected and is now recognized by everyone, the publisher never bothered to change the name of the journal to the correct form }{\b\lang1033 Parma Eldalambion}{\lang1033  (and so, eve
r and anon, I get an e-mail from some fresh student wondering why my site is called }{\b\lang1033 Ardalambion}{\lang1033  and not }{\b\lang1033 Ardalamberon}{\lang1033 
...) In some cases, Tolkien himself seems uncertain which plural ending should be used. In PM:332, the plural form of }{\b\lang1033 Ingw\'eb}{\lang1033  "Elf of the First Clan [also name of the king of that clan]" is given as }{\b\lang1033 Ingwi}{
\lang1033 , just as we would expect; yet a few pages later, in PM:340, we find }{\b\lang1033 Ingwer}{\lang1033  instead (it is there said that the First Clan, the Vanyar, called }{\i\lang1033 themselves}{\lang1033 
 Ingwer, so perhaps this reflects a special Vanyarin usage?) It may be noted that in Tolkien's earliest "Qenya", more nouns in -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  apparently had plural forms in -}{\b\lang1033 er}{\lang1033 . For instance, the early poem }{
\i\lang1033 Narqelion}{\lang1033  has }{\b\lang1033 lasser}{\lang1033  as the plural of }{\b\lang1033 lass\'eb}{\lang1033  "leaf", but in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  in LotR Tolkien used the plural form }{\b\lang1033 lassi}{\lang1033 . 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 As far as I know, the words in the exercises below all follow the normal rule: Nouns ending in -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033 , except as a part of -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033 
, have plurals in -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 .
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par This leaves only one group of nouns to be considered, namely those that end in a consonant. These nouns, just like those that end in -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033 , are seen to have plurals in -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 . A few examples: }{\b\lang1033 
Eleni}{\lang1033  "stars", the plural form of }{\b\lang1033 elen}{\lang1033  "star", occurs in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  (and also in WJ:362, where both the singular and the plural form are quoted). The }{\i\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\lang1033 
 has }{\b\lang1033 Atani}{\lang1033  for "Men" (not "males", but humans as opposed to Elves); this is formed from the singular word }{\b\lang1033 Atan}{\lang1033 . According to WJ:388, the word }{\b\lang1033 Casar}{\lang1033  "Dwarf" has the plural }{
\b\lang1033 Casari}{\lang1033  "Dwarves". 
\par 
\par Of these two plural endings \endash  }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  as in }{\b\lang1033 Eldar}{\lang1033  "Elves", but }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  as in }{\b\lang1033 Atani}{\lang1033  "(Mortal) Men" \endash 
 Tolkien imagined the latter to be the most ancient. The plural ending -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  comes directly from Primitive Elvish -}{\i\lang1033 \'ee}{\lang1033 , a word like }{\b\lang1033 Quendi}{\lang1033  representing primitive }{\i\lang1033 
Kwend\'ee}{\lang1033 . The plural ending -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  arose later: "For the showing of many the new device of }{\i\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  was brought in and used in all words of a certain shape \endash 
 and this, it is said, was begun among the Noldor" (PM:402). In primary-world terms, both plural endings were however present in Tolkien's conception from the beginning; already in his earliest work on "
Qenya", written during World War I, we find forms like }{\b\lang1033 Qendi}{\lang1033  (as it was then spelt) and }{\b\lang1033 Eldar}{\lang1033 
 coexisting. The twin plural endings are a feature that evidently survived throughout all the stages of Tolkien's development of Quenya, from 1915 to 1973.
\par 
\par }{\fs20\lang1033 NOTE ON THE DIFFERENT WORDS FOR "ELF": As the attentive reader will have inferred from the above, there is more than one Quenya word for "Elf". The word with the widest application, within the scope of Tolkien's fiction, was }{
\b\fs20\lang1033 Quend\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  pl. }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Quendi}{\fs20\lang1033 . This form is at least associated with the word "to speak" (}{\b\fs20\lang1033 quet}{\fs20\lang1033 
-), and Tolkien speculated that ultimately these words were indeed related via a very primitive base }{\i\fs20\lang1033 KWE}{\fs20\lang1033 - having to do with vocal speech (see WJ:391-392). When the Elves awoke by the mere of Cuivi\'e9nen, they call
ed themselves }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Quendi}{\fs20\lang1033  (or in primitive Elvish actually }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Kwend\'ee}{\fs20\lang1033 ) since for a long time they knew of no other speaking creatures. Eventually the Vala }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Orom\'eb}{
\fs20\lang1033  found them under a starlit sky, and he gave them a new name in the language they themselves had developed: }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Eld\'e2i}{\fs20\lang1033 , often translated "Starfolk". In Quenya, this primitive word later appeared as }{
\b\fs20\lang1033 Eldar}{\fs20\lang1033  (singular }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Elda}{\fs20\lang1033 ). While the term }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Eldar}{\fs20\lang1033  (}{\i\fs20\lang1033 Eld\'e2i}{\fs20\lang1033 
) was originally meant to apply to the entire Elvish race, it was later only used of the Elves that accepted the invitation of the Valar to come and dwell in the Blessed Realm of Aman and embarked on the Great March to get there (the term }{
\b\fs20\lang1033 Eldar}{\fs20\lang1033  is also applicable to those who never actually made it all the way to Aman, such as the }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Sindar}{\fs20\lang1033  or Grey-elves who stayed in Beleri
and). Those who refused the invitation were called }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Avari}{\fs20\lang1033 , "Refusers", and hence all Elves (}{\b\fs20\lang1033 Quendi}{\fs20\lang1033 ) can be subdivided into }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Eldar}{\fs20\lang1033  and }{
\b\fs20\lang1033 Avari}{\fs20\lang1033 . Only the former play any important part in Tolkien's narratives. So in later Quenya the situation was this: }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Quend\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  pl. }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Quendi}{\fs20\lang1033 
 remained as the only truly universal term for all Elves of any kind, but this was a technical word primarily used by the Loremasters, not a word that would be used in daily speech. The gender-specific variants of }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Quend\'eb}{
\fs20\lang1033  "Elf", namely masculine }{\b\fs20\lang1033 quendu}{\fs20\lang1033  and feminine }{\b\fs20\lang1033 quendi}{\fs20\lang1033 , would presumably be used only if you wanted to speak of a specifically }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Elvish}{\fs20\lang1033 
 (wo)man as opposed to a (wo)man of any other sentient race: These are not the normal Quenya words for "man" and "woman" (the normal words are }{\b\fs20\lang1033 n\'e9r}{\fs20\lang1033  and }{\b\fs20\lang1033 n\'eds}{\fs20\lang1033 
, presumably applicable to a man or woman of any sentient race, not just Elves). The normal, everyday Quenya term for "Elf" was }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Elda}{\fs20\lang1033 , and the fact that this word }{\i\fs20\lang1033 technically}{\fs20\lang1033 
 didn't apply to Elves of the obscure Avarin tribes living somewhere far east in Middle-earth was no big problem since none of them was ever seen anyway. Regarding the compound }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Eldali\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  (which combines }{
\b\fs20\lang1033 Elda}{\fs20\lang1033  with }{\b\fs20\lang1033 li\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  "people, folk") Tolkien wrote that when one of the Elves of Aman used this word, "he meant vaguely all the race of Elves, th
ough he was probably not thinking of the Avari" (WJ:374). \endash  Throughout the exercises found in this course, I have used }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Elda}{\fs20\lang1033  (rather than }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Quend\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033 
) as the standard translation of English "Elf", regardless of any specialized meaning it may have within Tolkien's mythos. As I said in the Introduction, in these exercises I largely eschew specific references to Tolkien's mythos and narratives. 
\par }{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang1033 THE ARTICLE
\par }{\lang1033 We have time for one more thing in this lesson: the }{\i\lang1033 article}{\lang1033 . An article, linguistically speaking, is such a w
ord as English "the" or "a, an". These little words are used in conjunction with nouns to express such different shades of meaning as "a horse" vs. "the horse". Anyone capable of reading this text in the first place will know what the difference is, so no
 
lengthy explanation is necessary. In short, "a horse" refers to a horse that hasn't been mentioned before, so you slip in the article "a" as a kind of introduction: "Look, there's a horse over there!" You may also use the phrase "a horse" if you want to s
ay something that is true of any horse, as in "a horse is an animal". If, on the other hand, you say "the horse", it usually refers to one definite horse. Hence "the" is termed the }{\i\lang1033 definite article}{\lang1033 
, while "a, an", lacking this "definite" aspect, is conversely called the }{\i\lang1033 indefinite article}{\lang1033 .
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
 In this respect at least, Quenya is somewhat simpler than English. Quenya has only one article, corresponding to the English definite article "the" (and since there is no indefinite article it must be distinguished from, 
we may simply speak of "the article" when discussing Quenya). The Quenya word corresponding to English "the" is }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 . For instance, }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  has }{\b\lang1033 i eleni}{\lang1033 
 for "the stars". As can be inferred from the above, Quenya has no word corresponding to English "a, an". Wh
en translating Quenya into English, one simply has to slip in "a" wherever English grammar demands an indefinite article, as in the famous greeting }{\b\lang1033 Elen s\'edla l\'famenn' omentielvo}{\lang1033 , "}{\i\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 
 star shines upon the hour of our meeting". As we see, the first word of the Quenya sentence is simply }{\b\lang1033 elen}{\lang1033 
 "star", with nothing corresponding to the English indefinite article "a" before it (or anywhere else in the sentence, for that matter). In Quenya, there is no way you can maintain the distinction between "a star" and just "star"; both are simply }{
\b\lang1033 elen}{\lang1033 
. Luckily there isn't much of a distinction to be maintained anyway. Languages like Arabic, Hebrew and classical Greek employ a similar system: there is a definite article corresponding to English "the", but nothing corresponding 
to the English indefinite article "a, an" (and this is the system used in Esperanto as well). After all, the }{\i\lang1033 absence}{\lang1033 
 of the definite article is itself enough to signal that a (common) noun is indefinite, so the indefinite article is in a way superfluous. Tolkien decided to do without it in Quenya, so students only have to worry about }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 
 = "the".
\par Sometimes, Tolkien connects the article to the next word by means of a hyphen or a dot: }{\b\lang1033 i-mar}{\lang1033  "the earth" (}{\i\lang1033 F\'edriel's Song}{\lang1033 ), }{\b\lang1033 i\'b7coimas}{\lang1033  "the lifebread" (PM:396). However
, he did not do so in LotR (we have already quoted the example }{\b\lang1033 i eleni}{\lang1033  "the stars" in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 ), and neither will we here.
\par The Quenya article is generally used as in English. However, some nouns that would require the article in English are apparently counted as proper names in Quenya, and so take no article. For instance, the sentence }{\b\lang1033 Anar caluva tielyanna}{
\lang1033  is translated "}{\i\lang1033 the}{\lang1033  Sun shall shine upon your path" (UT:22, 51); yet there is no article in the Quenya sentence. "The Sun" is not **}{\b\lang1033 i Anar}{\lang1033 , but simply }{\b\lang1033 Anar}{\lang1033 . Clearly }{
\b\lang1033 Anar}{\lang1033  is perceived as a proper name, designating one celestial body only, and you don't have to say "the Anar" any more than an English-speaking person would say "the Mars". The name of "the" Moon, }{\b\lang1033 Isil}{\lang1033 
, undoubtedly behaves like }{\b\lang1033 Anar}{\lang1033  in this respect. It may be noted that both words are treated as proper names in the }{\i\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\lang1033 
, chapter 11: "Isil was first wrought and made ready, and first rose into the realm of the stars... Anar arose in glory, and the first dawn of the Sun was like a great fire..."
\par Also notice that before a plural denoting an entire people (or even race), the article is not normally used. WJ:404 mentions a saying }{\b\lang1033 Valar valuvar}{\lang1033 
, "the will of the Valar will be done" (or more literally *"the Valar will rule"). Notice that "the Valar" is simply }{\b\lang1033 Valar}{\lang1033  in Quenya, not }{\b\lang1033 i Valar}{\lang1033 . Similarly, PM:395 has }{\b\lang1033 lamb\'eb Quendion }{
\lang1033 for "language of the Elves" and }{\b\lang1033 coimas Eldaron}{\lang1033  for "}{\i\lang1033 coimas}{\lang1033  [lembas] of the Eldar" \endash  not **}{\b\lang1033 lamb\'eb i Quendion}{\lang1033 , **}{\b\lang1033 coimas i Eldaron}{\lang1033 
. (The ending -}{\b\lang1033 on}{\lang1033  here appended to the plurals }{\b\lang1033 Quendi}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 Eldar}{\lang1033  signifies "of"; this ending should not affect whether or not the article has to be present before the word.)
\par With this usage compare Tolkien's use of "Men" in his narratives to refer to the human race as such: "Men awoke in Hild\'f3rien at the rising of the Sun... A darkness lay upon the hearts of Men... Men (it is said) were at first very few in number..." (}{
\i\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\lang1033 , chapter 17.) By contrast, "the Men" would refer, not to the entire race, but only to a casual group of "Men" or humans. Quenya pl
urals denoting entire peoples or races seem to behave in the same way. In a Quenya text there would probably be no article before plurals like }{\b\lang1033 Valar}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 Eldar}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 Vanyar}{\lang1033 , }{
\b\lang1033 Noldor}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 Lindar}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 Teleri}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 Atani}{\lang1033  etc. as long as the entire race or people is considered, even though Tolkien's English narratives speak of "}{\i\lang1033 
the}{\lang1033  Valar", "}{\i\lang1033 the}{\lang1033  Eldar" etc. However, if we replace }{\b\lang1033 Eldar}{\lang1033 
 with its equivalent "Elves", we see that the article often would often not be required in English, either (e.g. "Elves are beautiful" = }{\b\lang1033 Eldar nar vany\'eb}{\lang1033 ; if you say "the Elves are beautiful" = }{\b\lang1033 i Eldar nar vany
\'eb}{\lang1033 , you are probably describing once particular group of Elves, not the entire race).
\par Occasionally, especially in poetry, the article seemingly drops out for no special reason. Perhaps it is simply omitted because of metric considerations. The first line of }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ai! lauri\'eb lantar lassi s
\'farinen}{\lang1033 , Tolkien translated "ah! like gold fall }{\i\lang1033 the}{\lang1033  leaves..." \endash  though there is no }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  before }{\b\lang1033 lassi}{\lang1033 
 "leaves" in the Quenya text. The Markirya poem also leaves out the article in a number of places, if we are to judge by Tolkien's English translation of it.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\i\cf2\lang1033 Summary of Lesson Two:}{\lang1033  There is a plural ending -}{\b\lang1033 li}{\lang1033  the function of which we don't fully understand, so we will leave it alone for now. The normal plural is formed by adding -}{\b\lang1033 r}{
\lang1033  to nouns ending in any of the vowels -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 , plus nouns ending in -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033 
. If, on the other hand, the noun ends in -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  (except, of course, as part of -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033 ) the plural ending is usually -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  (displacing the final -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033 
); nouns ending in a consonant also form their plurals in -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 . The Quenya }{\i\lang1033 definite article}{\lang1033 , corresponding to English "the", is }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 
; there is no indefinite article like English "a, an".
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang1033 VOCABULARY}{\lang1033 
\par Regarding Frodo hearing Galadriel singing }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 , the LotR states that "as is the way of E
lvish words, they remained graven in his memory". This may be a comforting thought to students attempting to memorize Quenya vocabulary. In the lessons proper, while I discuss various aspects of Quenya, I will normally mention quite a few words \endash 
 but in th
e exercises, I will only use words from the "vocabulary" list that is hereafter presented at the end of each lesson. Thus, this is all the student is excepted to carefully memorize (doing the exercises for the next lessons, you will also need vocabulary i
n
troduced earlier). We will introduce twelve new words in each lesson: a fitting number, since Tolkien's Elves preferred counting in twelves rather than tens as we do. A unified list of all the vocabulary henceforth employed in the exercises of this course
 can be downloaded from this URL: http://www.uib.no/People/hnohf/q-vocab.rtf
\par 
\par }{\b\lang1033 min\'eb}{\lang1033  "one" }{\fs20\lang1033 (from now on, we will introduce one new number in each lesson)}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 Anar}{\lang1033  "(the) Sun"
\par }{\b\lang1033 Isil}{\lang1033  "(the) Moon"
\par }{\b\lang1033 ar}{\lang1033  "and" }{\fs20\lang1033 (a most useful word that will allow us to have two exercises in one...translate "the Sun and the Moon", for instance...)}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 Elda}{\lang1033  "Elf"
\par }{\b\lang1033 li\'eb}{\lang1033  "people" }{\fs20\lang1033 (sc. an entire "ethnic group" or even race, as in }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Eldali\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  = the People of the Elves).
\par }{\b\lang1033 vend\'eb}{\lang1033  "maiden"}{\fs20\lang1033  (in archaic Quenya }{\b\fs20\lang1033 wend\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033 )}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 rocco}{\lang1033  "horse" }{\fs20\lang1033 (specifically "swift horse for riding", according to }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Letters}{\fs20\lang1033 :382)}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 aran}{\lang1033  "king"
\par }{\b\lang1033 t\'e1ri}{\lang1033  "queen"
\par }{\b\lang1033 tasar}{\lang1033  "willow" }{\fs20\lang1033 (by its form this could be the plural of **}{\b\fs20\lang1033 tasa}{\fs20\lang1033 , but no such word exists, and -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 r}{\fs20\lang1033 
 is here part of the basic word and not an ending. This word occurs, compounded, in LotR \endash  Treebeard chanting "In the willow-meads of Tasarinan [Willow-vale] I walked in the spring...")}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 nu}{\lang1033  "under"
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang1033 EXERCISES
\par }{\lang1033 
\par 1. Translate into English (or whatever language you prefer):
\par 
\par }{\i\lang1033 A.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Roccor}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 B.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Aran}{\lang1033  }{\i\fs20\lang1033 (two possible English translations!)}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 C.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 I rocco}{\lang1033 .
\par }{\i\lang1033 D.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 I roccor}{\lang1033 . 
\par }{\i\lang1033 E.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Arani}{\lang1033 .
\par }{\i\lang1033 F.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Min\'eb li\'eb nu min\'eb aran.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 G.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 I aran ar i t\'e1ri.
\par }{\i\lang1033 H. }{\b\lang1033 Vendi.}{\lang1033 
\par 
\par 2. Translate into Quenya:
\par 
\par }{\i\lang1033 I. }{\lang1033 Willows.
\par }{\i\lang1033 J.}{\lang1033  Elves.
\par }{\i\lang1033 K.}{\lang1033  The kings.
\par }{\i\lang1033 L.}{\lang1033  Peoples.
\par }\pard \qj\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\lang1033 M.}{\lang1033  The horse under }{\i\lang1033 (or, below)}{\lang1033  the willow.
\par }{\i\lang1033 N}{\lang1033 . A maiden and a queen.
\par }{\i\lang1033 O.}{\lang1033  The queen and the maidens.
\par }{\i\lang1033 P.}{\lang1033  The Sun and the Moon }{\i\fs20\lang1033 (I promised you that one...)}{\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs36\cf6\lang1033 LESSON THREE}{\b\fs32\cf6\lang1033 
\par }{\b\fs32\lang1033 Dual number. Stem variation.
\par }{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang1033 DUAL NUMBER
\par }{\lang1033 The previous lesson covered two Quenya plural forms: the somewhat mysterious "partitive plural" in -}{\b\lang1033 li}{\lang1033 , and the "normal" plural in either -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  (mostly depending 
on the shape of the word). Like quite a few "real" languages, Quenya also possesses a }{\i\lang1033 dual}{\lang1033  form, that has no direct counterpart in English. Dual number refers to }{\i\lang1033 two}{\lang1033  things, a }{\i\lang1033 couple}{
\lang1033  of things. The dual is formed with one out of two endings: -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 .
\par \tab Within the fictional timeline imagined by Tolkien, these two endings originally had somewhat different meanings, and so were not completely interchangeable. A footnote in Letters:427 provides some information on this. The ending -}{\b\lang1033 u}{
\lang1033  (from Primitive Elvish -}{\i\lang1033 \'fb}{\lang1033 ) was originally used in the case of }{\i\lang1033 natural pairs}{\lang1033 
, of two things or persons somehow belonging together as a logical couple. For instance, according to VT39:9, 11, the word }{\b\lang1033 p\'e9}{\lang1033  "lip" has the dual form }{\b\lang1033 peu}{\lang1033 
 "lips", referring to one person's pair of lips (and not, for instance, to the upper lip of one person and the lower lip of another, which would be just "two lips" and not a natural pair). The noun }{\b\lang1033 veru}{\lang1033 
, meaning "married pair" or "husband and wife", has dual form; in this case there does not seem to be a corresponding singular "spouse" (but we have }{\b\lang1033 verno}{\lang1033  "husband" and }{\b\lang1033 vess\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "wife" from the same root; see LR:352). The noun }{\b\lang1033 alda}{\lang1033  "tree" occurs in dual form with reference, not to any casual pair of trees, but the Two Trees of Valinor: }{\b\lang1033 Aldu}{\lang1033 . 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Notice that if the ending -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  is added to a noun ending in a vowel, this vowel is displaced: hence the dual of }{\b\lang1033 alda}{\lang1033  is }{\b\lang1033 aldu}{
\lang1033  rather than **}{\b\lang1033 aldau}{\lang1033  \endash  though a word quoted in PM:138, reproducing a draft for the LotR Appendices, seems to suggest that Tolkien for a moment considered pre
cisely the latter form. There is also an old source that has }{\b\lang1033 Aldaru}{\lang1033 , apparently formed by adding the dual ending -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  to the normal plural }{\b\lang1033 aldar}{\lang1033 
 "trees", but this seems to be an early experiment of Tolkien's that was probably long obsolete by the time he wrote LotR. In the dual form }{\b\lang1033 peu}{\lang1033 , the final vowel of }{\b\lang1033 p\'e9}{\lang1033 
 "lip" is apparently not displaced by the dual ending -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 . However, Quenya }{\b\lang1033 p\'e9}{\lang1033  is meant to descend from primitive Elvish }{\i\lang1033 pe\'f1e}{\lang1033 , whereas the dual form }{\b\lang1033 peu}{
\lang1033  is meant to come from }{\i\lang1033 pe\'f1\'fb}{\lang1033  (VT39:9) \endash  so the }{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033  of }{\b\lang1033 peu}{\lang1033  was not originally final.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab As for the other dual ending, -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , it according to Letters:427 represents an old element }{\i\lang1033 ata}{\lang1033 
. This, Tolkien noted, was originally "purely numerative"; it is indeed related to the Quenya word for the numeral "two", }{\b\lang1033 atta}{\lang1033 . By "purely numerative", Tolkien evidently meant that the dual in -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 
 could denote two things only casually related. For instance, }{\b\lang1033 ciryat}{\lang1033  as the dual form of }{\b\lang1033 cirya}{\lang1033  "ship" could refer to any two ships; }{\b\lang1033 ciryat}{\lang1033 
 would only be a kind of spoken shorthand for the full phrase }{\b\lang1033 atta ciryar}{\lang1033 
, "two ships". However, Tolkien further noted that "in later Q[uenya]", the dual forms were "only usual with reference to natural pairs". Precisely what he means by "later" Quenya cannot be determined; it could refer to Quenya as a ritual lang
uage in Middle-earth rather than the vernacular of the Eldar in Valinor. In any case, the Third Age Quenya we aim for in this course must certainly be included when Tolkien speaks of "later" Quenya, so here we will follow the rule that }{\i\lang1033 any}{
\lang1033  dual form must refer to some kind of natural or logical pair, not to two things only casually related. In other words, the dual in -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  came to have just the same "meaning" as a dual in -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 
. A dual like }{\b\lang1033 ciryat}{\lang1033  "2 ships" (curiously spelt "ciriat" in Letters:427, perhaps a typo) would not in later Quenya be used with reference to any two ships, but only of two ships that somehow form a }{\i\lang1033 pair}{\lang1033  
\endash  like two sister ships. If you just want to refer to two ships that do not in any way form a natural or logical pair, like any two ships that happen to be seen together, you would not use the dual form but simply the numeral }{\b\lang1033 atta}{
\lang1033  "two" \endash  hence }{\b\lang1033 atta ciryar}{\lang1033 .
\par \tab Since the two endings -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  and -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  had come to carry the same meaning, 
\par some rule is needed to determine when to use which. Which ending should be used can apparently be inferred from the shape of the word itself (just like the shape of the word normally determines whether the }{\i\lang1033 plural}{\lang1033 
 ending should be -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 ). In Letters:427, Tolkien noted that "the choice of }{\i\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  [was] decided by euphony", sc. by what sounded well \endash 
 adding as an example that -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  was preferred to -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  if the word that is to receive a dual ending already contains a }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  or the similar sound }{\b\lang1033 d}{\lang1033 
. Hence the dual of }{\b\lang1033 alda}{\lang1033  is }{\b\lang1033 aldu}{\lang1033  rather than **}{\b\lang1033 aldat}{\lang1033 . It seems that as far as later Quenya is concerned, -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 
 would be your first option as the dual ending, but if the noun it is to be added to already contains }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 d}{\lang1033 , you opt for -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 
 instead (remembering that this ending displaces any final vowels). The duals Tolkien listed in the Plotz Letter, }{\b\lang1033 ciryat}{\lang1033  "a couple of ships" and }{\b\lang1033 lasset}{\lang1033  "a couple of leaves" (formed from }{\b\lang1033 
cirya}{\lang1033  "ship" and }{\b\lang1033 lass\'eb}{\lang1033  "leaf") confirm that a words with no }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 d}{\lang1033  in them take the dual ending -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 . Perhaps the ending -}{\b\lang1033 u}
{\lang1033  would also be preferred in the case of nouns ending in a consonant, since -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 
 could not be added directly to such a word without producing a final consonant cluster that Quenya phonology wouldn't allow; unfortunately we have no examples. (If the ending -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 
 is to be used anyhow, a vowel would probably have to be inserted before it, producing a longer ending \endash  likely -}{\b\lang1033 et}{\lang1033 . We will eschew this little problem in the exercises below, since nobody really knows the answer.)
\par \tab It is clear, however, that Quenya has a number of old duals that do not follow the rule that the ending is normally -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , replaced by -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  only if there is a }{\b\lang1033 d}{\lang1033  or }{
\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  in the word it is to be added to. The examples }{\b\lang1033 veru}{\lang1033  "married pair" and }{\b\lang1033 peu}{\lang1033  "lips, pair of lips" are proof of that; here there is no }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 
d}{\lang1033  present, but the ending is still -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  rather than -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 . Presumably these are "fossilized" dual forms reflecting the older system in which only -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 
 denoted a natural or logical pair. The example }{\b\lang1033 peu}{\lang1033  "(pair of) lips" suggests that the ending -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  is used in the case of body-parts occurring in pairs, such as eyes, arms, legs. (The other ending -}{
\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  may however be used if certain other endings intrude before the dual ending itself; we will return to this in a later lesson.) The word for "arm" is }{\b\lang1033 ranco}{\lang1033 
; the dual form denoting one person's pair of arms is not attested, but my best guess is that it would be }{\b\lang1033 rancu}{\lang1033 . The compound }{\b\lang1033 hendumaica}{\lang1033  "sharp-eye[d]" mentioned in WJ:337 }{\i\lang1033 may}{\lang1033 
 incorporate a dual }{\b\lang1033 hendu}{\lang1033  "(pair of) eyes". The Quenya word for "eye" is known to be }{\b\lang1033 hen}{\lang1033 , or }{\b\lang1033 hend}{\lang1033 - before an ending (the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 
 only mentions the normal plural }{\b\lang1033 hendi}{\lang1033  "eyes", LR:364). In the case of this word the dual ending would be -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  rather than -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  anyway, since there is a }{\b\lang1033 d}{\lang1033 
 in }{\b\lang1033 hend}{\lang1033 -. The word for "foot", }{\b\lang1033 t\'e1l}{\lang1033 , probably has the dual }{\b\lang1033 talu}{\lang1033  (for the shortening of the vowel, see below).
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang1033 STEM VARIATION 
\par }{\lang1033 This is 
a subject we shall have to spend some paragraphs on, since even on this early stage of the course we haven't been able to wholly eschew it. I will go into some detail here, but students can rest assured that they are not expected to remember all the words
 and examples below; just try to get a feel for what stem variation is all about.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Sometimes the form of a Quenya word subtly }{\i\lang1033 changes}{\lang1033  when you add endings to it. Two such words were mentioned above. If you add an ending to }{\b\lang1033 t\'e1l}{
\lang1033  "foot", for instance -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  for plural or -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  for dual, the long vowel }{\b\lang1033 \'e1}{\lang1033  is shortened to }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 . So the plural "feet" is }{\b\lang1033 tali}{
\lang1033  rather than **}{\b\lang1033 t\'e1li}{\lang1033 , the dual "a couple of feet" is }{\b\lang1033 talu}{\lang1033  rather than **}{\b\lang1033 t\'e1lu}{\lang1033 . In such a case, }{\b\lang1033 t\'e1l}{\lang1033  "foot" may be said to have the }{
\i\lang1033 stem}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 tal}{\lang1033 -. Likewise, the word }{\b\lang1033 hen}{\lang1033  "eye" has the }{\i\lang1033 stem}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 hend}{\lang1033 -, since its plural is }{\b\lang1033 hendi}{\lang1033  and not just **
}{\b\lang1033 heni}{\lang1033 . The "stem" form does not occur by itself, but is the form you add endings to. When presenting a gloss, I will represent such }{\i\lang1033 stem variation}{\lang1033  by listing the independent form first, followed by a 
parenthetical "stem form" with a hyphen where the ending goes, e.g.: }{\b\lang1033 t\'e1l}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 tal}{\lang1033 -) "foot", }{\b\lang1033 hen}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 hend}{\lang1033 -) "eye".
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab In the case of }{\b\lang1033 t\'e1l}{\lang1033  vs. }{\b\lang1033 tal}{\lang1033 
-, the variation is apparently due to the fact that vowels were often lengthened in words of only one syllable, but when t
he word had endings the word obviously got to have more than one syllable and so the lengthening did not occur (another example of the same seems to be }{\b\lang1033 n\'e9r}{\lang1033  "man" vs. plural }{\b\lang1033 neri}{\lang1033 
 "men", MR:213/LR:354). Originally, the vowel was short in all forms. It is usually true that the stem form gives away how the word looked at an }{\i\lang1033 earlier}{\lang1033  stage in the long linguistic evolution Tolkien dreamed up in great detail. }
{\b\lang1033 Hen}{\lang1033  "eye" in its stem }{\b\lang1033 hend}{\lang1033 - reflects the primitive "base" }{\i\lang1033 KHEN-D-E}{\lang1033  from which it is ultimately derived (LR:364). Quenya could not have -}{\b\lang1033 nd}{\lang1033 
 at the end of a word and simplified it to -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  when the word stands alone (thus, }{\b\lang1033 hen}{\lang1033  in a way }{\i\lang1033 represents}{\lang1033  the impossible "full" form }{\b\lang1033 hend}{\lang1033 
), but before an ending the group -}{\b\lang1033 nd}{\lang1033 - was not final and could therefore actually appear. 
Very often stem variation has to do with clusters or sounds that are not allowed at the end of words, but that may appear elsewhere. Cf. a word like }{\b\lang1033 talan}{\lang1033  "floor". The plural "floors" is not **}{\b\lang1033 talani}{\lang1033 
 as we might expect, but }{\b\lang1033 talami}{\lang1033 . The stem is }{\b\lang1033 talam}{\lang1033 - because this is the form of the Primitive Elvish root-word: }{\i\lang1033 TALAM}{\lang1033 
 (LR:390). As Quenya evolved from Primitive Elvish, a rule came into place that only a few consonants were allowed at the end of words, and }{\b\lang1033 m}{\lang1033  was not one of them. The closest "permissible" consonant was }{\b\lang1033 n}{
\lang1033 , and so the old word }{\i\lang1033 talam}{\lang1033  was altered to }{\b\lang1033 talan}{\lang1033  \endash  but in the plural form }{\b\lang1033 talami}{\lang1033  (and other forms that added an ending to the word), the }{\b\lang1033 m}{
\lang1033  was not final and therefore persisted unchanged. Another, similar case is }{\b\lang1033 filit}{\lang1033  "small bird", that has the stem }{\b\lang1033 filic}{\lang1033 - (e.g. plural }{\b\lang1033 filici}{\lang1033 
 "small birds"): The primitive root-word was }{\i\lang1033 PHILIK}{\lang1033  (LR:381), but Quenya did not permit -}{\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033  at the end of a word, so in that position it became -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 . When not final it remained }{
\b\lang1033 k}{\lang1033  (here spelt }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033 ).
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 In some cases, the "independent" form is a }{\i\lang1033 simplified}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 shortened}{\lang1033 
 form of a word, while the stem form reflects the fuller form. For instance, Tolkien apparently imagined that the word }{\b\lang1033 merend\'eb}{\lang1033  "feast, festival" was often shortened to }{\b\lang1033 meren}{\lang1033 , but the stem is still }{
\b\lang1033 merend}{\lang1033 - (LR:372). Hence the plural of }{\b\lang1033 meren}{\lang1033  is }{\b\lang1033 merendi}{\lang1033 , not **}{\b\lang1033 mereni}{\lang1033 . When it stands alone, the word }{\b\lang1033 niss\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "woman" is normally reduced to }{\b\lang1033 nis}{\lang1033  (or }{\b\lang1033 n\'eds}{\lang1033  with a lengthened vowel), but the double }{\i\lang1033 S}{\lang1033  persists before endings: thus the plural "women" is }{\b\lang1033 nissi}{\lang1033 
 (LR:377, MR:213). A similar case is }{\b\lang1033 Silmarill\'eb}{\lang1033 , the name of one of the legendary jewels created by F\'ebanor; this is normally shortened to }{\b\lang1033 Silmaril}{\lang1033 , but before endings the double }{\i\lang1033 L}{
\lang1033  of the full form is preserved (}{\b\lang1033 Silmarill}{\lang1033 -); hence the plural is always }{\b\lang1033 Silmarilli}{\lang1033 . In the case of }{\i\lang1033 compound}{\lang1033  wor
ds, sc. words made up from several other words, the second element in the compound is often reduced, but a fuller form may turn up before an ending. For instance, the noun }{\b\lang1033 Sindel}{\lang1033  "Grey-elf" (WJ:384) incorporates -}{\b\lang1033 el
}{\lang1033  as a reduced form of }{\b\lang1033 Elda}{\lang1033  "Elf". The plural of }{\b\lang1033 Sindel}{\lang1033  is not **}{\b\lang1033 Sindeli}{\lang1033 , but }{\b\lang1033 Sindeldi}{\lang1033  preserving the cluster -}{\b\lang1033 ld}{\lang1033 
- seen in }{\b\lang1033 Elda}{\lang1033 . (Since the final -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  is lost in the compound, we cannot have the plural **}{\b\lang1033 Sindeldar}{\lang1033 .)
\par In some cases a word may be }{\i\lang1033 contracted}{\lang1033  when you add endings to it. In such cases the stem-form does }{\i\lang1033 not}{\lang1033 
 reflect the older, more complete form of the word. Such contraction often occurs in two-syllable words containing two identical vowels. For instance, }{\b\lang1033 feren}{\lang1033  "beech-tree" is reduced to }{\b\lang1033 fern}{\lang1033 
- before an ending, e.g. plural }{\b\lang1033 ferni}{\lang1033  instead of **}{\b\lang1033 fereni}{\lang1033 . WJ:416 likewise indicates that }{\b\lang1033 laman}{\lang1033  "animal" may be reduced to }{\b\lang1033 lamn}{\lang1033 
- before an ending, hence for instance }{\b\lang1033 lamni}{\lang1033  "animals", though the unreduced form }{\b\lang1033 lamani}{\lang1033  was also in use. Occasionally, the contracted forms suffer further change when compared t
o the unreduced form; as the plural of }{\b\lang1033 seler}{\lang1033  "sister" we might expect **}{\b\lang1033 selri}{\lang1033 , but since }{\b\lang1033 lr}{\lang1033  is not a permissible consonant cluster in Quenya, it is changed to }{\b\lang1033 ll}{
\lang1033  \endash  the actual plural "sisters" being }{\b\lang1033 selli}{\lang1033  (cf. the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 , entry }{\i\lang1033 THEL}{\lang1033 -, }{\i\lang1033 THELES}{\lang1033 -).
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par Another form of stem-variation is very poorly attested as far as nouns are concerned, but there are hints to the effect that the }{\i\lang1033 final vowel}{\lang1033  of some words would change when an ending is added. In Quenya, the final vowels -}{
\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033  and -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  sometimes come from -}{\i\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  and -}{\i\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  in Primitive Elvish. At one stage of the linguistic evolution, original short -}{\i\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 
 became -}{\i\lang1033 e}{\lang1033  when the vowel was final; in the same environment original short -}{\i\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  became -}{\i\lang1033 o}{\lang1033 . For instance, the primitive word }{\i\lang1033 tundu}{\lang1033 
 "hill, mound" came out as }{\b\lang1033 tundo}{\lang1033  in Quenya (LR:395). But since this change only occurred when the vowel was }{\i\lang1033 final}{\lang1033 
, it is possible that its original quality would be preserved before an ending. The plural "hills" may well be }{\b\lang1033 tundur}{\lang1033  rather than }{\b\lang1033 tundor}{\lang1033 , though neither form is attested. According to SD:415, 
the Quenya noun }{\b\lang1033 l\'f3m\'eb}{\lang1033  "night" has the "stem" }{\b\lang1033 l\'f3mi}{\lang1033 -, evidently meaning that the final vowel -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  changes to -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 
- if you add an ending after it. For instance, adding the dual ending -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  to }{\b\lang1033 l\'f3m\'eb}{\lang1033  (to express "a couple of nights") would presumably produce }{\b\lang1033 l\'f3mit}{\lang1033  rather than }{
\b\lang1033 l\'f3met}{\lang1033 . This would be because }{\b\lang1033 l\'f3m\'eb}{\lang1033  comes from Primitive Elvish }{\i\lang1033 d\'f4mi}{\lang1033  (LR:354), and -}{\i\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  never turned into -}{\i\lang1033 e}{\lang1033 
 except when final. Some think certain words in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 l\'edrinen }{\lang1033 and }{\b\lang1033 s\'farinen}{\lang1033 , are attested examples of this phenomenon: These are forms of }{\b\lang1033 l\'edr\'eb}{
\lang1033  "song" and }{\b\lang1033 s\'far\'eb}{\lang1033  "wind" (the latter is attested by itself in MC:222; the meaning of the ending -}{\b\lang1033 nen}{\lang1033  seen in }{\b\lang1033 l\'edrinen}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 s\'farinen}{\lang1033 
 will be discussed in a later lesson). If this word originally ended in an -}{\i\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  that became -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  only later (and only when final), it may explain why in this word -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033 
 seemingly turns into -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 - before an ending. We would then say that }{\b\lang1033 s\'far\'eb}{\lang1033  has the stem }{\b\lang1033 s\'fari}{\lang1033 -.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 There seems to be a similar variation involving the final vowel -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033 , that in some cases descend from final -}{\i\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  in Primitive Elvish; aga
in the primitive quality of the vowel may be resurrected if an ending is added to it. For instance, }{\b\lang1033 rusco}{\lang1033  "fox" is said to have the stem }{\b\lang1033 ruscu}{\lang1033 
-, so if we add the dual ending to speak of a "a couple of foxes", the resulting form should presumably be }{\b\lang1033 ruscut}{\lang1033  rather than }{\b\lang1033 ruscot}{\lang1033 
. However, there is no extensive treatment of this phenomenon in Tolkien's published writings; indeed the statements made in SD:415 and VT41:10 that }{\b\lang1033 l\'f3m\'eb}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 rusco}{\lang1033  have stems }{\b\lang1033 l\'f3mi}
{\lang1033 -, }{\b\lang1033 ruscu}{\lang1033 - are as close as we get to explicit references to it.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par The student should not despair, thinking that all sorts of strange things typically happen whenever you add an ending to a Quenya word, so that there is a great potential for making embarrassing mistakes (or at least very much extra stuff to memorize)
. Most Quenya words seem to be quite well-behaved, with no distinct "stem" form to remember; you just add the ending and that's it. Where a distinct stem-form is known to exist (or where we have good reason to suspect one), this will of course be indicate
d when I first present the word, if it is relevant for the exercises.
\par 
\par }{\i\cf2\lang1033 Summary of Lesson Three:}{\lang1033  In addition to the plural form(s), Quenya also has a }{\i\lang1033 dual}{\lang1033  number used for a pair of things forming some kind of natural or logical couple. (We must assume that t
wo things only casually associated would be denoted by a normal plural in conjunction with the numeral }{\b\lang1033 atta}{\lang1033  "two".) The dual is formed with one out of two endings: -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 
 (the latter displaces final vowels; the dual of }{\b\lang1033 alda}{\lang1033  "tree" is therefore }{\b\lang1033 aldu}{\lang1033  rather than }{\b\lang1033 aldau}{\lang1033 ). One's first choice seems to be -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 
, but if the word this ending is to be added to already contains a }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  or a }{\b\lang1033 d}{\lang1033 , the alternative ending -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  is preferred instead (for reasons of euphony \endash 
 if you like, to avoid "crowding" the word with }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 's or similar sounds!) However, there seems to be a number of old, "fossilized" dual forms that end in -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  even though there is no }{\b\lang1033 d}{
\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  in the word, such as }{\b\lang1033 veru}{\lang1033  "married pair" and }{\b\lang1033 peu}{\lang1033  "pair of lips". The latter example may suggest that all body-parts occurring in 
pairs are denoted by dual forms in -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  rather than -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , regardless of the shape of the word (though the ending -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 
 is evidently preferred if other endings intrude before the dual ending itself; more on this later).
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Quite a few Quenya words subtly }{\i\lang1033 change}{\lang1033  when endings are appended to them, e.g. }{\b\lang1033 talan}{\lang1033  "floor" turning into }{\b\lang1033 talam}{\lang1033 
- in the plural form }{\b\lang1033 talami}{\lang1033 . We would then call }{\b\lang1033 talam}{\lang1033 - the }{\i\lang1033 stem form}{\lang1033  of }{\b\lang1033 talan}{\lang1033 . Similarly, the final vowels -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033  and -}{
\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  sometimes appear as -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 - and -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 -, respectively, if some ending is added; thus }{\b\lang1033 l\'f3m\'eb}{\lang1033  "night" has the stem }{\b\lang1033 l\'f3mi}{\lang1033 
-. In many cases, the stem-form echoes the older shape of words (sounds or combinations that could not survive at the end of a word being preserved where not final), though the stem-form may also represent a contraction.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang1033 VOCABULARY
\par }{\b\lang1033 
\par atta}{\lang1033  "two"
\par }{\b\lang1033 hen}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 hend}{\lang1033 -) "eye"
\par }{\b\lang1033 ranco}{\lang1033  "arm"
\par }{\b\lang1033 ando}{\lang1033  "gate"
\par }{\b\lang1033 cirya}{\lang1033  "ship"
\par }{\b\lang1033 aiw\'eb}{\lang1033  "bird"
\par }{\b\lang1033 talan}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 talam}{\lang1033 -) "floor"
\par }{\b\lang1033 n\'e9r}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 ner}{\lang1033 -) "man" }{\fs20\lang1033 (adult male of any sentient race \endash  Elvish, mortal or otherwise)}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 n\'eds}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 niss}{\lang1033 -) "woman" }{\fs20\lang1033 (similarly: adult female of any sentient race)}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 sar}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 sard}{\lang1033 -) "stone" }{\fs20\lang1033 (a small stone \endash  not "stone" as a substance or material) }{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 alda}{\lang1033  "tree"
\par }{\b\lang1033 oron}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 oront}{\lang1033 -) "mountain"
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang1033 EXERCISES
\par }{\lang1033 
\par 1. Translate into English:
\par 
\par }{\i\lang1033 A.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Hendu}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 B.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Atta hendi}{\lang1033  }{\i\fs20\lang1033 (and answer: what is the difference between this and }{\b\i\fs20\lang1033 hendu}{\i\fs20\lang1033  above?)}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 C.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Aldu}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 D.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Atta aldar}{\lang1033  }{\i\fs20\lang1033 (and answer again: what is the difference between this and }{\b\i\fs20\lang1033 Aldu}{\i\fs20\lang1033  above?)}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 E.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Min\'eb n\'e9r ar min\'eb n\'eds.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 F.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 I sardi.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 G.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Talami.
\par }{\i\lang1033 H. }{\b\lang1033 Oronti.}{\lang1033 
\par 
\par 2. Translate into Quenya:
\par 
\par }{\i\lang1033 I. }{\lang1033 Two ships }{\i\fs20\lang1033 (just any two ships that happen to be seen together)}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 J.}{\lang1033  Two ships }{\i\fs20\lang1033 (that happen to be sister ships)}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 K.}{\lang1033  Arms }{\i\fs20\lang1033 (the two arms of one person)
\par }\pard \qj\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\lang1033 L.}{\lang1033  Two mountains }{\i\fs20\lang1033 (within the same range; Twin Peaks, if you like \endash  use a dual form)}{\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\lang1033 M.}{\lang1033  Double gate }{\i\fs20\lang1033 (use a dual form)}{\lang1033 
\par }\pard \qj\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\lang1033 N}{\lang1033 . Two birds }{\i\fs20\lang1033 (that have formed a pair)}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 O.}{\lang1033  Two birds }{\i\fs20\lang1033 (just any two birds)}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 P.}{\lang1033  Men and women.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs36\cf6\lang1033 LESSON FOUR}{\b\fs32\cf6\lang1033 
\par }{\b\fs32\lang1033 The Adjective. The Copula. Adjectival agreement in number.  
\par }{\lang1033 
\par The vocabulary of any language can be separated into various classes of words \endash  various }{\i\lang1033 parts of speech}{\lang1033 . Tolkien's languages were designed to be "definitely of a European kind in style and structure" (}{\i\lang1033 Letters
}{\lang1033 :175), so the parts of speech they contain are not very exotic, but ought to be quite familiar to any schoolchild in Europe or America. We have already mentioned the }{\i\lang1033 nouns}{\lang1033 , which by a somewhat simplified d
efinition are words denoting things. Now we will move on to the }{\i\lang1033 adjectives}{\lang1033 .
\par \tab Adjectives are words that have assumed the special function of }{\i\lang1033 description}{\lang1033 . If you want to say that someone or something possesses a certain quality, you can often find an adjective that will do the job. In a sentence like }
{\i\lang1033 the house is red}{\lang1033 , the word "red" is an adjective. It describes the house. There are adjectives for all sorts of qualities, quite useful if you want to say that someone or something is }{\i\lang1033 big}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 
small}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 holy}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 blue}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 silly}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 rotten}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 beautiful}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 thin}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 nauseous}{\lang1033 , 
}{\i\lang1033 tall}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 wonderful}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 obnoxious}{\lang1033  or whatever the occasion demands.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 One often distinguishes two different ways of using an adjective:
\par 1. You can team it up with a noun which it then describes, resulting in phrases like }{\i\lang1033 tall men}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 (a/the) red book}{\lang1033 . Such phrases can then be inserted into a full sentence, like }{\i\lang1033 
tall men scare me}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 the red book is mine}{\lang1033 , where the words }{\i\lang1033 tall}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 red}{\lang1033 
 simply provide extra information about their companion nouns. This is called using the adjective }{\i\lang1033 attributively}{\lang1033 . The quality in question is presented as an "attribute" of the noun, or is "attributed" to it (}{\i\lang1033 tall men
}{\lang1033  \endash  OK, then we know precisely what kind of men we are talking about here, the tall ones, their tallness being their "attribute").
\par 2. But you may also construct sentences where the whole }{\i\lang1033 point}{\lang1033  is that someone or something possesses a specific quality. You don't just "presuppose" the tallness as when you speak of }{\i\lang1033 tall men}{\lang1033  \endash 
 you want to say that }{\i\lang1033 the men are tall}{\lang1033 , that's the very piece of information you want to convey. This is called using an adjective }{\i\lang1033 predicatively}{\lang1033 : You choose a party you want to say something about, like 
}{\i\lang1033 the men}{\lang1033  in this case, and then add an adjective to tell what quality this party possesses. The adjective is then called the }{\i\lang1033 predicate}{\lang1033  of this sentence.
\par As the attentive reader already suspects from the example above, there is one more complication: You don't just say }{\i\lang1033 the men tall}{\lang1033 , but }{\i\lang1033 the men are tall}{\lang1033 . Actually sentences like }{\i\lang1033 the men tall}
{\lang1033  would be quite OK in a great number of languages (and Quenya may even be one of them), but in English you have to slip in a word like }{\i\lang1033 are}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 is}{\lang1033 
 before the adjective when you use it as a predicate: }{\i\lang1033 The book is red}{\lang1033 . }{\i\lang1033 The men are tall}{\lang1033 . This "is/are" doesn't really add a whole lot of meaning here (there i
s a reason why so many languages manage without any corresponding word!), but it is used to "couple" the adjective with the words that tell us what we are really talking about here \endash  like }{\i\lang1033 the book}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 the men
}{\lang1033  in our example. Hence "is/are" is called a }{\i\lang1033 copula}{\lang1033 . In sentences like }{\i\lang1033 gold is beautiful}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 I am smart}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 stones are hard}{\lang1033 
, it can be perceived the prime function of the copula (here variously manifesting as }{\i\lang1033 is}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 am}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 are}{\lang1033 ) is simply to connect the following adjectives }{\i\lang1033 beautiful}{
\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 smart}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 hard}{\lang1033  with the thing(s) or person we are talking about: }{\i\lang1033 gold}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 I}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 stones}{\lang1033 
. The copula is an integral part of the predicate of the sentence. This is one of the most important constructions speakers or English have at their disposal when they want to say that X possesses the quality Y.
\par Well, let's get down to Quenya here. When compared to the plethora of shapes that a noun can have, Quenya }{\i\lang1033 adjectives}{\lang1033  are quite restricted in form. The vast majority of Quenya adjectives end in one of two vowels -}{\b\lang1033 a}{
\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033 . The latter ending is the less common and typically occurs in colour-adjectives: }{\b\lang1033 Ninqu\'eb}{\lang1033  "white", }{\b\lang1033 mor\'eb}{\lang1033  "black", }{\b\lang1033 carn\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "red", }{\b\lang1033 varn\'eb}{\lang1033  "brown" etc. When an adjective does not end in -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033 , it virtually always ends in -}{\b\lang1033 in}{\lang1033 , e.g. }{\b\lang1033 firin}{\lang1033 
 "dead", }{\b\lang1033 hwarin}{\lang1033  "crooked", }{\b\lang1033 melin}{\lang1033  "dear" or }{\b\lang1033 latin}{\lang1033  "open, free, cleared (of land)". The latter adjective is actually listed as }{\b\lang1033 latin}{\lang1033 (}{\b\lang1033 a}{
\lang1033 ) in Tolkien's writings (LR:368), evidently suggesting that }{\b\lang1033 latin}{\lang1033  is shortened from a longer form }{\b\lang1033 latina}{\lang1033 , both variants occurring in the language. (Perhaps all the adjectives in -}{\b\lang1033 
in}{\lang1033  are to be considered shortened forms of full forms in -}{\b\lang1033 ina}{\lang1033 .) Adjectives that do }{\i\lang1033 not}{\lang1033  end in either -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 in}{
\lang1033  are extremely rare; there is at least }{\b\lang1033 teren}{\lang1033  "slender" \endash  but even this adjective also has a longer form in -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 teren\'eb}{\lang1033 ).
\par Adjectives in -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  are by far the most common type. The final vowel -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  may appear by itself, as in }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1ra}{\lang1033  "flat", but it is often part of a longer adjectival ending like -}{
\b\lang1033 wa}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033  (variant -}{\b\lang1033 da}{\lang1033 ), -}{\b\lang1033 ima}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033 . Examples: }{\b\lang1033 helwa}{\lang1033  "(pale) blue", }{\b\lang1033 harna}{\lang1033 
 "wounded", }{\b\lang1033 melda}{\lang1033  "beloved, dear", }{\b\lang1033 melima}{\lang1033  "loveable", }{\b\lang1033 vanya}{\lang1033  "beautiful". The word }{\b\lang1033 Quenya}{\lang1033  itself is in its origin a }{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033 
-adjective meaning "Elvish, Quendian", though Tolkien decided that it came to be used only as a name of the High-elven language (Letters:176, WJ:360-361, 374).
\par In Quenya as in English, an adjective can be directly combined with a noun, describing it. We have many attested examples of adjectives being used attributively like this; they include the phrases }{\b\lang1033 lint\'eb yuldar}{\lang1033 
 "swift draughts" (}{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 ), }{\b\lang1033 luini tellumar}{\lang1033  "blue vaults" (prose-style }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 ), }{\b\lang1033 f\'e1na cirya}{\lang1033  "a white ship" (}{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{
\lang1033 ), }{\b\lang1033 quant\'eb tengwi}{\lang1033  "full signs" (a term used by early Elvish linguists; we needn't discuss its precise meaning here; see VT39:5). In these examples, the word order is the same as in English: adjective + noun.
 This is apparently the normal, preferred order. In Quenya, it is however also permissible to let the adjective }{\i\lang1033 follow}{\lang1033  the noun. For instance, }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{\lang1033  has }{\b\lang1033 anar p\'far\'eba}{\lang1033 
 for "a bleared sun", literally "(a) sun bleared", and in LR:47 we have }{\b\lang1033 mall\'eb t\'e9ra}{\lang1033 , litera
lly "road straight", for "a straight road" (cf. LR:43). Perhaps this word order is used if you want to emphasize the adjective: the context in LR:47 indicates that this is a }{\i\lang1033 straight}{\lang1033 
 road as opposed to a bent one. However, letting the adjective follow the noun may be the normal word order in the case of an adjectival "title" that is used in conjunction with a proper name: In UT:305 cf. 317 we have }{\b\lang1033 Elendil Voronda}{
\lang1033  for "Elendil the Faithful" (well, the form found in UT:305 is actually }{\b\lang1033 Elendil Vorondo}{\lang1033 , because the phrase is inflected; we will return to the ending -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033 
 here seen in a later lesson). Presumably you could also use the more normal word-order and speak of }{\b\lang1033 voronda Elendil}{\lang1033 , but that \endash  I guess \endash  would simply be a more casual reference to "faithful Elendil
", not meaning "Elendil the Faithful" with the adjective used as a regular title. It may be noted that Quenya, unlike English, does not insert the article before an adjective used as a title (not **}{\b\lang1033 Elendil i Voronda}{\lang1033 
, at least not necessarily). 
\par What, then, about using adjectives as }{\i\lang1033 predicates}{\lang1033 , like "red" is the predicate of the sentence "the book is red"? (Contrast the }{\i\lang1033 attributive}{\lang1033 
 use of the adjective in a phrase like "the red book".) The adjective }{\b\lang1033 vanwa}{\lang1033  "lost" is used predicatively in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 : }{\b\lang1033 Vanwa n\'e1...Valimar}{\lang1033 
 "lost is...Valimar" (a place in the Blessed Realm that Galadriel thought she would never see again). This sentence tells us that the Quenya copula "is" has the form }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033 . Plural "are" seems to be }{\b\lang1033 nar}{\lang1033 
, attested in an early version of }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  recorded by Tolkien on tape (see Jim Allan's }{\i\lang1033 An Introduction to Elvish}{\lang1033 
, p. 5). It is generally assumed that these copulas would be used as in English, for instance like this:
\par 
\par }{\b\lang1033 I parma n\'e1 carn\'eb.}{\lang1033  "The book is red."
\par }{\b\lang1033 Ulundo n\'e1 \'fam\'eba.}{\lang1033  "A monster is evil."
\par }{\b\lang1033 I neri nar hall\'eb.}{\lang1033  "The men are tall."}{\b\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par In this lesson as originally published in December 2000, I slipped in a warning at this point:
\par 
\par }{\fs20\lang1033 I should add, though, that due to the extreme scarcity of examples we can't be certain what the preferred word order really is. From the example }{\b\fs20\lang1033 vanwa n\'e1...Valimar}{\fs20\lang1033  "lost is...Valimar" in }{
\i\fs20\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  one could argue that }{\b\fs20\lang1033 n\'e1}{\fs20\lang1033  should }{\i\fs20\lang1033 follow}{\fs20\lang1033  the adjective, so that "the book is red" should rather be }{\b\fs20\lang1033 i parma carn\'eb
 n\'e1}{\fs20\lang1033 , "the book red is". It would be interesting to know if }{\b\fs20\lang1033 n\'e1}{\fs20\lang1033  "is" would still follow }{\b\fs20\lang1033 vanwa}{\fs20\lang1033  "lost" if we relocated }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Valimar}{\fs20\lang1033 
 to the beginning of the sentence; should "Valimar is lost" be }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Valimar n\'e1 vanwa}{\fs20\lang1033 , English-style, or perhaps }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Valimar vanwa n\'e1}{\fs20\lang1033 
? In the examples above and the exercises below I have organized the sentences using the "English" word order, but Tolkien }{\i\fs20\lang1033 may}{\fs20\lang1033 
 have had something more exotic up his sleeve. There is no way of telling before more material is published.
\par }{\lang1033 
\par I revise this lesson in November 2001, and this summer a few more examples involving the word }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033  "is" finally became available. There does seem to be a tendency to place }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033 
 at the end of the sentence, as in the example }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1 caritas...alasaila n\'e1}{\lang1033  (literally, "not to do it unwise is" \endash  VT42:34). Yet the same article that provides this example also cites the formula "A }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1
 calima l\'e1}{\lang1033  B" (literally, "A is bright beyond B") as the Quenya way of expressing "A is brighter than B" (VT42:32). Notice that this formula employs an English-style word-order, with }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033 
 "is" preceding rather than following }{\b\lang1033 calima}{\lang1033  "bright". So it seems that sentences like }{\b\lang1033 i parma n\'e1 carn\'eb}{\lang1033 
, word by word corresponding to English "the book is red", may be possible after all. Therefore I have not revised any of the examples or exercises of this course, all of which employ the "English" word order as far as the copula }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{
\lang1033  is concerned. It seems, however, that the order }{\b\lang1033 i parma carn\'eb n\'e1}{\lang1033 
 "the book red is" must be considered a perfectly valid alternative, and Tolkien may even have intended this to be the more common word order. We must await still more examples.
\par \tab [New update, January 2002: This month some new examples were indeed published. It seems that the exact word order is simply a matter of taste. The example }{\b\lang1033 ely\'eb na manna}{\lang1033 
 "thou art blessed" from VT43:26 has an English-style word order, and here the copula "is/art" appears in the short form }{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033  rather than }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033 . I have however maintained }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033 
 in the exercises of this course, mainly for the sake of clarity: the word }{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033  has several other, quite distinct meanings. But perhaps the short form }{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033 - is consistently preferred when som
e ending is to be added; cf. the plural form }{\b\lang1033 nar}{\lang1033  "are". Of course, the unattested form }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1r}{\lang1033  could be equally valid for all I know.]
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 In F\'edriel's Song (a pre-LotR text), the word for "is" appears as }{\b\lang1033 ye}{\lang1033  rather than }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033 , as in }{\b\lang1033 
\'edrima ye N\'famenor}{\lang1033  "lovely is N\'famenor" (LR:72). However, both the }{\i\lang1033 Qenya Lexicon}{\lang1033  (QL:64) and the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033  (LR:374) point to }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033  instead, and in }{
\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  we have this word attested in an actual text. Etym and the QL are earlier than F\'edriel's Song, but }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  is later, so would seem that }{\b\lang1033 ye}{\lang1033 
 was just a passing experiment in Tolkien's evolution of Quenya. In F\'edriel's Song we also see an }{\i\lang1033 ending}{\lang1033  for "is", -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033 
, appended to adjectives and displacing their final vowel: hence in this song we have }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  for "(it) is good", derived from the adjective }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1ra}{\lang1033  "good". This ending -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{
\lang1033  is transparently related to the independent word }{\b\lang1033 ye}{\lang1033 . I don't think the system of using the ending -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033 
 for "is" was still valid in LotR-style Quenya, and I wouldn't recommend it to writers. The ending -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033  has other meanings in later Quenya.
\par Another system may well be valid, though: using no copula at all. You simply juxtapose the noun and the adjective, the word "is/are" being understood: }{\b\lang1033 Ilu vanya}{\lang1033  "the World [is] fair" (}{\i\lang1033 F\'edriel's Song}{\lang1033 ), 
}{\b\lang1033 maller raicar}{\lang1033  "roads [are] bent" (LR:47). The formula "A is bright beyond B" = "A is brighter than B" referred to above is actually cited as "A (}{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033 ) }{\b\lang1033 calima l\'e1}{\lang1033 
 B" in VT42:32. As suggested by the parentheses, }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033  could be omitted. The example }{\b\lang1033 malle t\'e9ra}{\lang1033  "a straight road" mentioned above could also 
be interpreted "a road [is] straight", if the context allowed it. The final version of Tolkien's Quenya translation of the Hail Mary, published in January 2002, leaves out several copulas: }{\b\lang1033 Aistana ely\'eb, ar aistana i y\'e1v\'eb m\'f3nalyo}
{\lang1033  = "blessed [art] thou, and blessed [is] the fruit of thy womb".
\par We must assume that the copula }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 nar}{\lang1033  is not limited to combining nouns and adjectives, but can also be used to equate nouns: }{\b\lang1033 Parmar nar engwi}{\lang1033  "books are things", }{
\b\lang1033 F\'eban\'e1ro n\'e1 Noldo}{\lang1033  "F\'ebanor is a Noldo". (Notice, by the way, that the proper Quenya form of F\'ebanor's name is }{\b\lang1033 F\'eban\'e1ro}{\lang1033 ; "F\'eb
anor" is a Quenya-Sindarin hybrid form used in Middle-earth after his death.) Again it may be permissible to leave out the copula and retain the same meaning: }{\b\lang1033 Parmar nati}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 F\'eban\'e1ro Noldo}{\lang1033 .
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 Adjectival agreement in number:}{\lang1033  Quenya adjectives must agree in number with the noun they describe. That is, if the noun is plural, the adjective must be, too; if the adjective describes }{\i\lang1033 several}{\lang1033 
 nouns it must also be plural, even if each of the nouns is singular. English makes no such distinction \endash  its adjectives do not change \endash 
 but it is not surprising that Tolkien built adjectival agreement in number into Quenya, since this was to be a highly inflected language.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033  We have no examples of what happens if an adjective is to agree with a noun in the }{\i\lang1033 dual}{\lang1033 
 form. It is generally assumed, though, that there are no special dual forms of adjectives, but only one plural (or should we say "non-singular") form. The }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{\lang1033  poem indicates that there is no special form of ad
jectives to go with the somewhat obscure "partitive plural" form in -}{\b\lang1033 li}{\lang1033 ; an adjective describing a noun in -}{\b\lang1033 li}{\lang1033 
 simply appears in the normal plural form. This may support the theory that adjectives don't have a special }{\i\lang1033 dual}{\lang1033  form, either.
\par How, then, is the plural form of adjectives constructed? From the examples now available, it can be seen that Tolkien experimented with various systems over the years. In }{\i\lang1033 early}{\lang1033  sources, adjectives in -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 
 form their plural form by adding the ending -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 , just like nouns in -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  do. For instance, one very early "map" of Tolkien's imaginary world (actually depicted as a symbolic ship) includes a reference to }
{\b\lang1033 I Nori Landar}{\lang1033 . This evidently means "The Wide Lands" (LT1:84-85; the adjective }{\b\lang1033 landa}{\lang1033  "wide" occurs in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 , entry }{\i\lang1033 LAD}{\lang1033 
. Christopher Tolkien in LT1:85 suggests the translation "The Great Lands".) Here the plural noun }{\b\lang1033 nori}{\lang1033  "lands" is described by the adjective }{\b\lang1033 landa}{\lang1033  "wide" \endash 
 another example of an attributive adjective }{\i\lang1033 following}{\lang1033  the noun, by the way \endash  and since the noun is plural, the adjective takes the plural ending -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 
 to agree with it. This way of forming plural adjectives was still valid as late as 1937 or slightly earlier; we have already quoted the example }{\b\lang1033 maller raicar}{\lang1033  "roads [are] bent" from LR:47, where the adjective }{\b\lang1033 raica
}{\lang1033  "crooked, bent, wrong" (listed by itself in LR:383) is plural to agree with }{\b\lang1033 maller}{\lang1033 .
\par However, this system cannot be recommended to writers; the evidence is that in LotR-style Quenya, it had been abandoned. Tolkien in a way reached back into the past
 and revived a system he had used in what may be the very first "Qenya" poem he ever wrote, }{\i\lang1033 Narqelion}{\lang1033  of 1915-16. In this poem, adjectives in -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  form their plurals by means of the ending -}{\b\lang1033 i
}{\lang1033 . For instance, the phrase }{\b\lang1033 sangar \'fam\'ebai}{\lang1033  occurring in this poem apparently means "throngs large" = large throngs; the adjective }{\b\lang1033 \'fam\'eba}{\lang1033 
 "large" is listed in the early Qenya Lexicon (QL:97 \endash  but in later Quenya, the word }{\b\lang1033 \'fam\'eba}{\lang1033  means "evil" instead). Later, Tolkien however introduced one more complication: Adjectives in -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 
 had plurals in -}{\b\lang1033 ai}{\lang1033  in }{\i\lang1033 archaic}{\lang1033  Quenya only. In Exilic Quenya, Quenya as spoken by the Noldor after they had returned to Middle-earth, -}{\b\lang1033 ai}{\lang1033 
 at the end of words of more than one syllable had been reduced to -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033 . (Cf. WJ:407 regarding the ending -}{\b\lang1033 v\'eb}{\lang1033  representing "archaic Q -}{\i\lang1033 vai}{\lang1033 
".) So while the plural form of, say, }{\b\lang1033 quanta}{\lang1033  "full" was apparently }{\b\lang1033 quantai}{\lang1033  at the older stages of the language, it later became }{\b\lang1033 quant\'eb}{\lang1033 
. This form we have already met in one of the examples quoted above: }{\b\lang1033 quant\'eb tengwi}{\lang1033 , "full signs", where }{\b\lang1033 quanta}{\lang1033  appears in the plural form to agree with }{\b\lang1033 tengwi}{\lang1033 
 "signs" (VT39:5).
\par There is one special case to be considered: adjectives in -}{\b\lang1033 \'eba}{\lang1033 , such as }{\b\lang1033 laur\'eba}{\lang1033  "golden". In archaic Quenya, we must assume that the plural form was simply }{\b\lang1033 laur\'ebai}{\lang1033 
. But when -}{\b\lang1033 ai}{\lang1033  later became -}{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033 , what would be ?}{\b\lang1033 laur\'ebe}{\lang1033  did not prove to be a durable form. To avoid the cumbersome combination of two concomitant }{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033 
's, the first of them was changed to }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 . Hence the plural form of }{\b\lang1033 laur\'eba}{\lang1033  in Exilic Quenya appears as }{\b\lang1033 lauri\'eb}{\lang1033 , as in the first line of }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 
: }{\b\lang1033 Ai! lauri\'eb lantar lassi s\'farinen...}{\lang1033  "Ah! golden fall the leaves in the wind..." \endash  the adjective being plural to agree with the noun it describes, }{\b\lang1033 lassi}{\lang1033  "leaves".
\par As for adjectives in -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033 , they seem to behave like most nouns of the same shape: -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  becomes -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  in the plural. We don't have very many examples, but the phrase }{
\b\lang1033 luini tellumar}{\lang1033  "blue vaults" in the prose version of }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  seems to incorporate the plural form of an adjective }{\b\lang1033 luin\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "blue" (actually not attested in this form, but as observed above, there are many colour-adjectives in -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033 ). Moreover, in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033  Tolkien noted that the an adjective }{\b\lang1033 mait\'eb}{
\lang1033  "handy, skilled" has the plural form }{\b\lang1033 maisi}{\lang1033  (LR:371). Evidently the plural form was especially mentioned primarily to illustrate another point: that adjectives in -}{\b\lang1033 it\'eb}{\lang1033  have plural forms in -
}{\b\lang1033 isi}{\lang1033 , the consonant }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  turning into }{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  before }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 
. This particular idea seems to have been dropped later, though: In a much later, post-LotR source, Tolkien wrote }{\b\lang1033 hlon\'edti tengwi}{\lang1033 , not ?}{\b\lang1033 hlon\'edsi tengwi}{\lang1033 , for "phonetic signs"
 (WJ:395). So perhaps the plural form of }{\b\lang1033 mait\'eb}{\lang1033  could simply be ?}{\b\lang1033 maiti}{\lang1033  as well.
\par As for the plural form of adjectives ending in a consonant, such as }{\b\lang1033 firin}{\lang1033  "dead", we don't seem to have any examples to guide us. It has traditionally been assumed that they form their plurals in -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 
, just like nouns of this shape do, and this still seems reasonably plausible. So, say, "dead men" could be }{\b\lang1033 firini neri}{\lang1033 . If any argument can be raised against this assumption, it is that adjectives in -}{\b\lang1033 in}{
\lang1033  actually seem to be shortened forms of longer adjectives in -}{\b\lang1033 ina}{\lang1033 . As pointed out above, Tolkien quoted the adjective meaning "open, free, cleared (of land)" as }{\b\lang1033 latin}{\lang1033 (}{\b\lang1033 a}{
\lang1033 ), indicating double forms }{\b\lang1033 latin}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 latina}{\lang1033 . The plural form of }{\b\lang1033 latina}{\lang1033  should obviously be }{\b\lang1033 latin\'eb}{\lang1033 , for older }{\b\lang1033 latinai}{
\lang1033 . But what about }{\b\lang1033 latin}{\lang1033 ? If this is merely a shortened form of }{\b\lang1033 latina}{\lang1033 , perhaps the plural form would still be }{\b\lang1033 latin\'eb}{\lang1033  rather than }{\b\lang1033 latini}{\lang1033 
? We cannot know for certain; in the exercises below I have followed the traditional assumption, using plurals in -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 . Adjecti
ves ending in a consonant are quite rare anyway, so this uncertainty does not greatly jeopardize the quality of our own Quenya texts.
\par In what positions do adjectives agree in number? Attested examples like those already quoted, like }{\b\lang1033 luini tellumar}{\lang1033  "blue do
mes", would seem to indicate that an attributive adjective in front of the noun does show agreement. So does an attributive adjective }{\i\lang1033 following}{\lang1033  the noun; the }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{\lang1033  poem has }{\b\lang1033 i fairi n\'e9
c\'eb}{\lang1033  for "the pale phantoms", or literally "the phantoms pale" (}{\b\lang1033 n\'e9ca}{\lang1033  pl. }{\b\lang1033 n\'e9c\'eb}{\lang1033  "vague, faint, dim to see", MC:223). An adjective }{\i\lang1033 separated}{\lang1033 
 from the noun it describes also agrees in number, hence }{\b\lang1033 laur\'eba}{\lang1033  "golden" appears in plural form }{\b\lang1033 lauri\'eb}{\lang1033  in the first line of }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 lauri\'eb
 lantar lassi}{\lang1033  "golden fall leaves" (the prose }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  has }{\b\lang1033 lassi lantar lauri\'eb}{\lang1033  "leaves fall golden"). As for }{\i\lang1033 predicative}{\lang1033 
 adjectives, we lack late examples. In German, adjectives do agree in number when they are used attributively, but adjectives used predicatively do not. Yet the old example }{\b\lang1033 maller raicar}{\lang1033  "r
oads [are] bent" in LR:47 would seem to indicate that in Quenya, adjectives agree in number also when they are used predicatively. In later Quenya we should presumably read }{\b\lang1033 maller (nar) raic\'eb}{\lang1033 
, since Tolkien changed the rules for how the plural form of adjectives is constructed.
\par So in short, we can conclude that adjectives agree in number with the nouns they describe "everywhere" \endash  whether they appear before, after or separated from the noun, whether they are used attributively or predicatively. There are a 
few examples that don't quite fit in, though. Appendix E of the essay }{\i\lang1033 Quendi and Eldar}{\lang1033  of ca. 1960 contains several "well-behaved" examples of plural adjectives that are used attributively with the plural noun }{\b\lang1033 
tengwi}{\lang1033  "signs", making up various phrases used by early Elvish linguists when they tried to analyze the structure of their tongue (as I said above, we needn't concern ourselves with the precise meaning of these terms here). Besides }{
\b\lang1033 hlon\'edti tengwi}{\lang1033  "phonetic signs" and }{\b\lang1033 quant\'eb tengwi}{\lang1033  "full signs" already quoted (WJ:395, VT39:5), we have }{\b\lang1033 racin\'eb tengwi}{\lang1033  "stripped signs" and }{\b\lang1033 peny\'eb tengwi}{
\lang1033  "lacking signs" (VT39:6; the singular of the latter, }{\b\lang1033 penya tengw\'eb}{\lang1033  "a lacking sign", is attested: VT39:19). In these phrases the adjectives }{\b\lang1033 hlon\'edt\'eb}{\lang1033  "phonetic", }{\b\lang1033 quanta}{
\lang1033  "full", }{\b\lang1033 racina}{\lang1033  "stripped, deprived" and }{\b\lang1033 penya}{\lang1033  "lacking, inadequate" all assume their plural forms, beautifully agreeing with }{\b\lang1033 tengwi}{\lang1033 
 "signs, elements, sounds". So far, so good. But then we turn to the }{\i\lang1033 draft}{\lang1033  material for Appendix E of }{\i\lang1033 Quendi and Eldar}{\lang1033 . Here Tolkien did }{\i\lang1033 not}{\lang1033 
 let the adjectives agree in number, and we have phrases like }{\b\lang1033 lehta tengwi}{\lang1033  "free/released elements", }{\b\lang1033 sarda tengwi}{\lang1033  "hard sounds" and }{\b\lang1033 tapta tengwi}{\lang1033 
 "impeded elements" (VT39:17). We would of course expect }{\b\lang1033 leht\'eb tengwi}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 sard\'eb tengwi}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 tapt\'eb tengwi}{\lang1033 , but th
ese are not found. Unless we are to assume that there are several classes of adjectives, some that agree in number and others that don't \endash  and I think this is rather far-fetched \endash 
 it seems that Tolkien in the draft material used a system whereby an attributive adjective immediately in front of its noun does }{\i\lang1033 not}{\lang1033 
 agree in number. But when he actually wrote the Appendix, he would seem to have introduced agreement in this position as well, and so we have for instance }{\b\lang1033 quant\'eb tengwi}{\lang1033  rather than ?}{\b\lang1033 quanta tengwi}{\lang1033  for
 "full signs". Elvish grammar could change at lightening speed whenever Tolkien was in his "revision" mood, so this would not be surprising.
\par The last version of the }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{\lang1033  poem, which Christopher Tolkien thinks was written at some point in the last decad
e of his father's life (1963-73), is also relevant here. In the phrase "fallen towers", Tolkien first wrote the adjective }{\b\lang1033 atalant\'eba}{\lang1033  "ruinous, downfallen" in its plural form }{\b\lang1033 atalanti\'eb}{\lang1033 
, just like we would expect. Then, according to Christopher Tolkien, he mysteriously }{\i\lang1033 changed}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 atalanti\'eb}{\lang1033  to the singular (or rather uninflected) form }{\b\lang1033 atalant\'eba}{\lang1033 
, though the adjacent noun "towers" was left in the plural (MC:222). Again Tolkien seems to be experimenting with a system whereby attributive adjectives immediately in fron
t of the noun they describe do not agree in number, but appear in their uninflected form. A similar system appears in Tolkien's writings on }{\i\lang1033 Westron}{\lang1033 
, the "Common Speech" of Middle-earth (a language he only sketched). Perhaps he considered introducing such a system in Quenya as well, and we see this idea flickering on and off, so to speak, in his writings?
\par However, the system I would recommend to writers is to let adjectives agree in number also in this position. In }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  in LotR we have the phrase }{\b\lang1033 lint\'eb yuldar}{\lang1033 
 "swift draughts", and in the interlinear translation in RGEO:66 Tolkien explicitly noted that }{\b\lang1033 lint\'eb}{\lang1033  is a "pl." adjective. We must assume, then, that }{\b\lang1033 lint\'eb}{\lang1033  represents older }{\b\lang1033 lintai}{
\lang1033 , the plural form of an adjective }{\b\lang1033 linta}{\lang1033 . If an attributive adjective immediately in front of the noun it describes did not agree in number, "swift draughts" should have been ?}{\b\lang1033 linta yuldar}{\lang1033 
 instead. The source where Tolkien explicitly identified }{\b\lang1033 lint\'eb}{\lang1033  as a plural form was published during his own lifetime, and moreover as late as in 1968, possibly postdating even the last version of }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{
\lang1033 . So his final decision seems to have been that adjectives }{\i\lang1033 do}{\lang1033  agree in number with their nouns also when the adjective appears immediately in front of the noun. One suspects that he spent many 
sleepless nights carefully considering the various pros and cons in this important question.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\fs20\cf1\lang1033 NOTE ON ADJECTIVES USED AS NOUNS: As described}{\fs20\lang1033  above, Tolkien at one stage had adjectives in -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 a}{\fs20\lang1033  form their plurals in -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 ar}{\fs20\lang1033 
, but later he replaced this with -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 \'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  (for older -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 ai}{\fs20\lang1033 ). However, adjectives in -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 a}{\fs20\lang1033  may still have plural forms in -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 ar}{
\fs20\lang1033  }{\i\fs20\lang1033 if they are used as nouns}{\fs20\lang1033 , because in such a case they are naturally inflected as nouns. Tolkien noted that instead of saying }{\b\fs20\lang1033 peny\'eb tengwi }{\fs20\lang1033 
"lacking signs" the Elves might simply refer to the }{\b\fs20\lang1033 penyar}{\fs20\lang1033  or "lacking ones" \endash  "using [the adjective] }{\i\fs20\lang1033 penya}{\fs20\lang1033 
 as a technical noun" (VT39:19). A more well-known example is provided by the adjective }{\b\fs20\lang1033 vanya}{\fs20\lang1033  "fair, beautiful"; this would normally have the plural form }{\b\fs20\lang1033 vany\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  (e.g. }{
\b\fs20\lang1033 vany\'eb nissi}{\fs20\lang1033  "beautiful women"). However, the adjective }{\b\fs20\lang1033 vanya }{\fs20\lang1033 
can also be used as a noun, "a Vanya" or "Fair One", which was the word used of a member of the First Clan of the Eldar. Then the whole clan is of course called the }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Vanyar}{\fs20\lang1033 , as in the }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Silmarillion}{
\fs20\lang1033  chapter 3: "The Vanyar were [Ingw\'eb's] people; they are the Fair Elves." Using another (but related) adjective "beautiful", namely }{\b\fs20\lang1033 vanima}{\fs20\lang1033 
, Treebeard employed another noun-style plural when he greeted Celeborn and Galadriel as }{\b\fs20\lang1033 a vanimar}{\fs20\lang1033  "o beautiful ones" (the translation given in Letters:308).
\par Adjectives in -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 \'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  would however have their usual plural form in -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 i}{\fs20\lang1033  even if they are used as nouns, since most nouns in -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 \'eb}{\fs20\lang1033 
 also form their plurals in -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 i}{\fs20\lang1033 .
\par }{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\cf2\lang1033 Summary of Lesson Four:}{\lang1033  Adjectives are words used to describe various qualities, such as "
tall" or "beautiful". They can be combined with nouns, making up phrases like "(a/the) red book" or "tall men", where the adjectives "red" and "tall" describe the nouns "book" and "men" directly; this is called using an adjective }{\i\lang1033 
attributively}{\lang1033 . But adjectives can also be used in sentences like "the book is red" or "the men are tall", where the whole point of the sentence is to ascribe a certain quality to a noun; here the adjective is used as a }{\i\lang1033 predicate}
{\lang1033 . In such cases English slips in a }{\i\lang1033 copula}{\lang1033 , like "is" o
r "are" in these examples, to clarify the relationship between the noun and the adjective. Many languages do without this extra device (one would just say what corresponds to "the book red"), and this seems to be permissible in Quenya as well, but the exp
licit copula }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033  "is"/}{\b\lang1033 nar}{\lang1033  "are" also occurs in the material. \endash  Most Quenya adjectives end in the vowel -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 , some also in -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033 
; the only ones that end in a consonant are a few that nearly always have the ending -}{\b\lang1033 in}{\lang1033  (apparently shortened from -}{\b\lang1033 ina}{\lang1033 ). Quenya adjectives agree in }{\i\lang1033 number}{\lang1033 
; if an adjective describes a plural noun or more than one noun, the adjective must be plural as well. Adjectives in -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  have plural forms in -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  (for older -}{\b\lang1033 ai}{\lang1033 
); notice that if the adjective ends in -}{\b\lang1033 \'eba}{\lang1033  it forms its plural in -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033  (to avoid -}{\b\lang1033 \'ebe}{\lang1033 ). Adjectives in -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  have plural forms in -}{
\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 ; for the few adjectives in -}{\b\lang1033 in}{\lang1033  we lack examples, but it is normally assumed that they would add -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  in the plural.
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang1033 VOCABULARY
\par }{\lang1033 Except for the two first items, all of these are adjectives. Don't worry about the other words occurring in the exercises below; those you have already memorized carefully, following my instructions in Lesson Two. Right?
\par 
\par }{\b\lang1033 neld\'eb}{\lang1033  "three"
\par }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033  "is" (}{\b\lang1033 nar}{\lang1033  "are")
\par }{\b\lang1033 vanya}{\lang1033  "beautiful, fair"
\par }{\b\lang1033 alta}{\lang1033  "great" }{\fs20\lang1033 (= }{\i\fs20\lang1033 big}{\fs20\lang1033 ; the word is used of physical size only)}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 calima}{\lang1033  "bright"
\par }{\b\lang1033 taura}{\lang1033  "mighty"
\par }{\b\lang1033 saila}{\lang1033  "wise" }{\fs20\lang1033 (we will use this form found in late material; a pre-LotR source has }{\b\fs20\lang1033 saira}{\fs20\lang1033  instead)}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 \'fam\'eba}{\lang1033  "evil"
\par }{\b\lang1033 carn\'eb}{\lang1033  "red" }{\fs20\lang1033 (we suspect that Tolkien the Devout Catholic was thinking about }{\i\fs20\lang1033 cardinals}{\fs20\lang1033  with their red attires; the Italian word }{\i\fs20\lang1033 carne}{\fs20\lang1033 
 = "[red] meat" may also be relevant here...) }{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 ninqu\'eb}{\lang1033  "white"
\par }{\b\lang1033 mor\'eb}{\lang1033  "black" }{\fs20\lang1033 (cf. the first element of Sindarin }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Mordor}{\fs20\lang1033  = Black Land)}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 firin}{\lang1033  "dead"
\par }{\cf2\lang1033 
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang1033 EXERCISES}{\b\lang1033 
\par }{\lang1033 
\par 1. Translate into English:
\par 
\par }{\i\lang1033 A.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Mor\'eb rocco.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 B.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Calim\'eb hendu.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 C.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Neld\'eb firini neri.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 D.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Vany\'eb aiwi.
\par }{\i\lang1033 E.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 T\'e1ri n\'e1 taura n\'eds.
\par }{\i\lang1033 F.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 I oronti nar alt\'eb.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 G.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Aran taura}{\i\fs20\lang1033  (two possible translations!)}{\b\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 H. }{\b\lang1033 I n\'e9r ar i n\'eds nar sail\'eb. }{\lang1033 
\par 
\par 2. Translate into Quenya:
\par 
\par }{\i\lang1033 I. }{\lang1033 The white gate.
\par }{\i\lang1033 J.}{\lang1033  A great ship.
\par }{\i\lang1033 K}{\lang1033 . The floor is red.
\par }{\i\lang1033 L}{\lang1033 . One black stone and three white stones.
\par }{\i\lang1033 M}{\lang1033 . Wise kings are mighty men.}{\i\lang1033 
\par N}{\lang1033 . The mighty man and the beautiful woman are evil.}{\i\lang1033 
\par O}{\lang1033 . Elves are beautiful.
\par }{\i\lang1033 P}{\lang1033 . The Elves are a beautiful people.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs36\cf6\lang1033 LESSON FIVE}{\cf6\lang1033 
\par }{\b\fs32\lang1033 The Verb: Present tense and agreement in number. Subject/object. The superlative form of adjectives.
\par }{\lang1033 
\par As I mentioned at the beginning of the previous lesson, the vocabulary of any language can be separated into various classes of words, or "parts of speech". So far we have explicitly discussed the }{\i\lang1033 nouns}{\lang1033 , which denote things, and 
}{\i\lang1033 adjectives}{\lang1033 , whic
h are words used to describe nouns (linguists would find these definitions rather simplistic, but they will do for our purpose). Actually we have already touched on a three other parts of speech as well, without discussing them in depth. As part of Lesson
 Two you hopefully memorized the word }{\b\lang1033 nu}{\lang1033  "under", which is a }{\i\lang1033 preposition}{\lang1033 ; prepositions are small words or "particles" like }{\i\lang1033 under}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 on}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 of}
{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 to}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 in}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 about}{\lang1033  etc., often used to provide information about spatial relationships (e.g. "}{\i\lang1033 under}{\lang1033  the tree" = }{\b\i\lang1033 nu}{
\b\lang1033  i alda}{\lang1033 ), though frequently they are used in more abstract contexts. With the word }{\b\lang1033 ar}{\lang1033  "and" we have also included the most typical representative of the }{\i\lang1033 conjunctions}{\lang1033 
, words used to connect (or indeed "conjoin") other words, phrases or sentences, e.g. }{\b\lang1033 Anar }{\b\i\lang1033 ar}{\b\lang1033  Isil}{\lang1033  = "the sun }{\i\lang1033 and}{\lang1033 
 the moon". Still, no thorough discussion of prepositions or conjunctions as such seems necessary: in Quenya they seem to behave pretty much like their English equivalents, so for the most part you simply have to learn the corresponding Quenya words.

\par \tab Another part of speech that we have already touched on is far more sophisticated and intriguing: the }{\i\lang1033 verb}{\lang1033 . We encountered one verb in the previous lesson: }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033  "is", with its plural form }{
\b\lang1033 nar}{\lang1033  "are". As verbs go, this one is not very exciting; it is used simply to coordinate a noun with some sort of predicate that tells us what the noun "is": }{\b\lang1033 Aran n\'e1 taura}{\lang1033 , "a king is mighty", }{
\b\lang1033 tasar n\'e1 alda}{\lang1033  "a willow is a tree". As I said in the previous lesson, the copula }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033  doesn't really provide much extra informatio
n here, except clarifying the relationship between the various elements of the sentence. Most other verbs (very nearly }{\i\lang1033 all}{\lang1033 
 other verbs, actually) are however full of meaning. They don't just tell us what someone or something "is", but what someone or something }{\i\lang1033 does}{\lang1033 . The Verb brings }{\i\lang1033 action}{\lang1033  into the language.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 In a sentence like "the Elf dances" it is easy to identify "dances" as the action-word, telling us what is going on here. And sure enough, "dances" is a form of the English verb }{\i\lang1033 
to dance}{\lang1033 . This verb may appear in other forms as well; instead of "dances" we might say "danced", which moves the action into the }{\i\lang1033 past}{\lang1033 
: "The Elf danced." This illustrates an important feature of verbs in European languages: the form of the verb gives information about }{\i\lang1033 when}{\lang1033  the act
ion denoted takes place, in the present or in the past. Some languages also have special }{\i\lang1033 future}{\lang1033  forms. Tolkien built all of these features into Quenya.
\par The different "time-forms" of the verb are called various }{\i\lang1033 tenses}{\lang1033 ; we speak of present tense, past tense 
and future tense. We will only deal with the present tense in this lesson, and return to the others later. (The trinity of present, past and future does not represent a full list of all the tenses there are. We will discuss a total of five different tense
s in this course, and I would be very surprised if unpublished material does not describe even more tenses than the ones we know at present.)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab Here I should slip in a warning: We don't have much }{\i\lang1033 explicit}{\lang1033  information about the Quenya verb. In the so-called P
lotz Letter, that Tolkien wrote to Dick Plotz at some point in the mid-sixties, he set out the declension of the noun. Apparently similar information about the verb was to follow; it never did. This is of course most unfortunate. Not that Tolkien took thi
s
 information to his grave; we know that he did write about these matters, but the relevant writings have not been published. For the time being, we must for the most part try to figure out the grammatical rules by ourselves if we would like our Quenya poe
ms to include verbs. Regarding the }{\i\lang1033 present}{\lang1033  tense, some scraps of information luckily appeared in }{\i\lang1033 Vinyar Tengwar}{\lang1033 
 #41, July 2000. Combining this info with some linguistic deduction, we can probably make out the main features of the system Tolkien had in mind.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 As they appear in various sources, Quenya verbs seem to fall into two }{\i\lang1033 main}{\lang1033 
 categories (though there are some verbs in our corpus that don't readily fit into either, even if we exclude the early "Qenya" material where some really weird things are going on 
in the verbal system). The first and largest category is what can be termed }{\i\lang1033 A-stems}{\lang1033 , for they all end in -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 . Another term for the same is }{\i\lang1033 derived}{\lang1033 
 verbs, for these verbs never represent a naked primitive "root-word", but are derived by }{\i\lang1033 adding endings}{\lang1033  to this root. The most frequent of these endings are -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033  and -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033 
; much less frequently we see -}{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033  or just -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 . Examples:
\par 
\par }{\b\lang1033 calya}{\lang1033 - "to illuminate" (root }{\i\lang1033 KAL}{\lang1033 )
\par }{\b\lang1033 tulta}{\lang1033 - "to send for, to fetch, to summon" (root }{\i\lang1033 TUL}{\lang1033 )
\par }{\b\lang1033 harna}{\lang1033 - "to wound" (root }{\i\lang1033 SKAR}{\lang1033 ; primitive initial }{\i\lang1033 sk}{\lang1033 - became }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033 - in Quenya)
\par }{\b\lang1033 mapa}{\lang1033 - "to grasp, to seize" (root }{\i\lang1033 MAP}{\lang1033 )
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par (Convention has it that when you list verbal stems as such, you add a hyphen at the end; Tolkien usually does so in his writings. The "stem" of a verb is a basic form that we start from when deriving other forms, such as different tenses.)
\par \tab If these A-stems can be termed "derived verbs", the other category consists of the "non-derived" or }{\i\lang1033 primary}{\lang1033  verbs. These are verbs that display }{\i\lang1033 no}{\lang1033  such ending as -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033 , -}{
\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 . The verbal stems in question can be termed "primary" or "basic" since they essentially represent a primitive root with no additions. For instance, the verb }{
\b\lang1033 mat}{\lang1033 - "eat" comes directly from the root }{\i\lang1033 MAT}{\lang1033 - of similar meaning. }{\b\lang1033 Tac}{\lang1033 - "fasten" represents the root }{\i\lang1033 TAK}{\lang1033 - "fix, make fast". }{\b\lang1033 Tul}{\lang1033 
- "come" can be identified with the root }{\i\lang1033 TUL}{\lang1033 - "come, approach, move towards" (contrast the }{\i\lang1033 derived}{\lang1033  verb }{\b\lang1033 tulta}{\lang1033 
- "send for, summon, fetch" from the same root, derived by means of the ending -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033 ). In the case of the roots }{\i\lang1033 MEL}{\lang1033 - "love" and }{\i\lang1033 SIR}{\lang1033 - "flow", Tolkien didn'
t even bother to repeat the glosses for the Quenya verbs }{\b\lang1033 mel}{\lang1033 - and }{\b\lang1033 sir}{\lang1033 - (see LR:372, 385).
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 When discussing Quenya verbs, we sometimes need to refer to the }{\i\lang1033 stem-vowel}{\lang1033 . This is the vowel of the root-word underlying the verb as it appears in Quenya. In the cas
e of primary verbs like }{\b\lang1033 mel}{\lang1033 - "love", it is of course easy to identify the stem-vowel, since }{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033  is the only vowel there is (and sure enough, this is also the vowel of the underlying root }{\i\lang1033 MEL}
{\lang1033 -). In the case of derived verbs like }{\b\lang1033 pusta}{\lang1033 - "stop" or }{\b\lang1033 ora}{\lang1033 - "impel", the vowels of the added ending (here -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033  and -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 ) do }{\i\lang1033 not}{
\lang1033  count as stem-vowels. }{\b\lang1033 Pusta}{\lang1033 -, for instance, is derived from a root }{\i\lang1033 PUS}{\lang1033 , and its stem-vowel is therefore }{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 , not }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 
. In the vast majority of cases, the stem-vowel is simply the }{\i\lang1033 first}{\lang1033  vowel of the verb (but not necessarily so, there may be some prefixed element).
\par With this we have the necessary terms in place and can finally start discussing the formation of the present tense. To start with the primary verbs, what seems to be the present tense of the verb }{\b\lang1033 mel}{\lang1033 
- "love" is attested in LR:61, Elendil telling his son Herendil: }{\b\lang1033 Yonya iny\'eb tye-}{\b\i\lang1033 m\'e9la}{\lang1033 , "I too, my son, I }{\i\lang1033 love}{\lang1033 
 thee". Here we have the verb describing a present or on-going (in this case quite permanent) action. Another example of a present-tense primary verb can apparently be found in the LotR itself, in the famous greeting }{\b\lang1033 elen }{\b\i\lang1033 s
\'edla}{\b\lang1033  l\'famenn' omentielvo}{\lang1033 , "a star }{\i\lang1033 shines}{\lang1033  [or, }{\i\lang1033 is shining}{\lang1033 ] upon the hour of our meeting". }{\b\lang1033 S\'edla}{\lang1033  would seem to be the present tense of a verb }{
\b\lang1033 sil}{\lang1033 - "shine (with white or silver light)", listed in the }{\i\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\lang1033  Appendix. }{\b\lang1033 M\'e9la}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 s\'edla}{\lang1033 
 show the same relationship to the simple verbal stems }{\b\lang1033 mel}{\lang1033 - and }{\b\lang1033 sil}{\lang1033 -: the present-tense forms are derived by }{\i\lang1033 lengthening}{\lang1033 
 the stem-vowel (this is denoted by supplying an accent, of course) and }{\i\lang1033 adding}{\lang1033  the ending -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 . This conclusion is supported by an example from VT41:13: The verb }{\b\lang1033 quet}{\lang1033 
- "speak, say" there appears in the present tense }{\b\lang1033 qu\'e9ta}{\lang1033  "is saying".
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab Though forms like }{\b\lang1033 m\'e9la}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 s\'edla}{\lang1033  may occasionally be translated using the simple present tense in English,
 hence "love(s)" and "shines", is seems that the Quenya present tense properly denotes a }{\i\lang1033 continuous}{\lang1033  or ongoing action that is best translated using the English "is ...-ing" construction, as in the example }{\b\lang1033 qu\'e9ta}{
\lang1033  just quoted: this is "is saying" rather than just "says". The conclusion that the Quenya present tense properly denotes }{\i\lang1033 continuous}{\lang1033 
 actions is also supported by other evidence: The Quenya present tense of the primary verb }{\b\lang1033 mat}{\lang1033 - "eat" is nowhere attested in published material. However, Tolkien stated that }{\i\lang1033 m\'e2t\'e2}{\lang1033 
 was "the stem of the continuous form", which could be translated "is eating" (VT39:9; }{\i\lang1033 \'e2}{\lang1033  here denotes long }{\i\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 , in Quenya spelt }{\b\lang1033 \'e1}{\lang1033 
). Tolkien actually put an asterisk in front of }{\i\lang1033 m\'e2t\'e2}{\lang1033  to mark it as an "unattested" form, so this should evidently be taken
 as primitive Elvish rather than Quenya. How Quenya evolved from the primitive language can be inferred from many other examples, so we know that }{\i\lang1033 m\'e2t\'e2}{\lang1033  would come out as }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1ta}{\lang1033 
. This form would seem to fall into the same pattern as }{\b\lang1033 m\'e9la}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 s\'edla}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 qu\'e9ta}{\lang1033 : lengthened stem-vowel and ending -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 
 (and working backwards, we can deduce that Tolkien meant }{\b\lang1033 m\'e9la}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 s\'edla}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 qu\'e9ta}{\lang1033  to be descended from primitive Elvish }{\i\lang1033 m\'eal\'e2}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 s
\'eel\'e2}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 kw\'eat\'e2}{\lang1033 ). Presumably these are all "continuous" forms; just like primitive }{\i\lang1033 m\'e2t\'e2}{\lang1033  "is eating" they apparently emphasize the }{\i\lang1033 ongoing}{\lang1033 
 nature of the action: }{\b\lang1033 S\'edla}{\lang1033  may literally be "is shining" rather than just "shines". Perhaps the lengthening of the stem-vowel somehow symbolizes this ongoing or "drawn-out" action. In the case of }{\b\lang1033 m\'e9la}{
\lang1033  in the sentence }{\b\lang1033 iny\'eb tye-m\'e9la}{\lang1033 , it is more natural to translate "I love you" rather than "I am loving you", but the latter would seem to be the most literal meaning.
\par 
\par Then we must consider the second and larger category of verbs, the A-stems. In their case, the information from VT41 is of particular value. 
\par 
\par It seems that the A-stems form their present tense by somewhat the same rule as the primary verbs, but the rule needs a little "adaptation" to fit the shape of an A-stem verb. Our sole attested example is the verb }{\b\lang1033 ora}{\lang1033 
- "urge" or "impel". VT41:13, 18 indicates that its present tense is }{\b\lang1033 \'f3r\'eba}{\lang1033  ("is urging"). As in the case of primary verbs, the stem-vowel has been lengthened and the ending -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 
 has been added. There is one complication, though: since the verbal stem }{\b\lang1033 ora}{\lang1033 - }{\i\lang1033 already}{\lang1033  ended in -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 , this vowel is }{\i\lang1033 changed to }{\b\i\lang1033 e}{\lang1033 
 so as to avoid two }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 's in sequence: What would be }{\b\lang1033 \'f3ra-a}{\lang1033  manifests as }{\b\lang1033 \'f3r\'eba}{\lang1033 . Hence we must conclude that verbs like }{\b\lang1033 mapa}{\lang1033 - "grasp, seize" and }{
\b\lang1033 lala}{\lang1033 - "laugh" appear as }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1p\'eba}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1l\'eba}{\lang1033  in the present tense.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Short A-stems like }{\b\lang1033 ora}{\lang1033 - or }{\b\lang1033 mapa}{\lang1033 - are however of a rather unusual shape, since they add only the simple vowel -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 
 to the original root. As discussed above, A-stems where the final -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  is only part of a longer derivational ending (most often -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033 ) are much more common. We have al
ready quoted examples like }{\b\lang1033 calya}{\lang1033 - "to illuminate" and }{\b\lang1033 tulta}{\lang1033 - "to summon" (roots }{\i\lang1033 KAL}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 TUL}{\lang1033 ). Such "complex" A-stems have a }{\i\lang1033 
consonant cluster}{\lang1033  following the vowel of the original root, like }{\b\lang1033 ly}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 lt}{\lang1033  in these examples. We have no actual example of the present 
tense of such a verb. If we were to apply the pattern we deduce to exist from the example }{\b\lang1033 \'f3r\'eba}{\lang1033  "is urging", it would land us on forms like ?}{\b\lang1033 c\'e1ly\'eba}{\lang1033  "is illuminating" and ?}{\b\lang1033 t\'falt
\'eba}{\lang1033  "is summoning". However, there seems to be a phonological rule in Quenya prohibiting a long vowel immediately in front of a consonant cluster. It would seem that a word like ?}{\b\lang1033 t\'falt\'eba}{\lang1033 
 cannot exist (but frankly I'm not quite sure about ?}{\b\lang1033 c\'e1ly\'eba}{\lang1033 , since }{\b\lang1033 ly}{\lang1033 /}{\b\lang1033 ny}{\lang1033 /}{\b\lang1033 ry}{\lang1033 
 sometimes seem to count as unitary palatalized consonants rather than consonant clusters). Lacking actual examples, we can only assume that in such a case the lengthening of the vowel would simply be dropped, so that the present tense of verbs like }{
\b\lang1033 calya}{\lang1033 - and }{\b\lang1033 tulta}{\lang1033 - would be }{\b\lang1033 caly\'eba}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 tult\'eba}{\lang1033  (though as I just indicated, ?}{\b\lang1033 c\'e1ly\'eba}{\lang1033  }{\i\lang1033 may}{\lang1033  be
 possible for all I know). This would apply wherever there is a consonant cluster following the vowel of the verbal stem. Further examples are }{\b\lang1033 lanta}{\lang1033 - "fall", }{\b\lang1033 harna}{\lang1033 - "wound" and }{\b\lang1033 pusta}{
\lang1033 - "stop", that would all \endash  presumably \endash  form their present-tense forms in -}{\b\lang1033 \'eba}{\lang1033 : }{\b\lang1033 Lant\'eba}{\lang1033  "is falling", }{\b\lang1033 harn\'eba}{\lang1033  "is wounding", }{\b\lang1033 pust\'eb
a}{\lang1033  "is stopping".
\par We must assume that this system also applies where there is a }{\i\lang1033 diphthong}{\lang1033  in the verbal stem, since like a vowel in front of a consonant cluster, a diphthong cannot be lengthened in any way. The present-tense forms of verbs like }{
\b\lang1033 faina}{\lang1033 - "emit light" or }{\b\lang1033 auta}{\lang1033 - "pass" would presumably be }{\b\lang1033 fain\'eba}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 aut\'eba}{\lang1033 .
\par We now know enough to start building simple sentences: 
\par \'a4 }{\b\lang1033 Isil s\'edla}{\lang1033  "the Moon is shining" (present tense }{\b\lang1033 s\'edla}{\lang1033  formed from the primary verb }{\b\lang1033 sil}{\lang1033 - "shine")
\par \'a4 }{\b\lang1033 I Elda l\'e1l\'eba}{\lang1033  "the Elf is laughing" (present tense formed from the short A-stem }{\b\lang1033 lala}{\lang1033 - "laugh")
\par \'a4 }{\b\lang1033 Lass\'eb lant\'eba}{\lang1033  "a leaf is falling" (present tense formed from the complex A-stem }{\b\lang1033 lanta}{\lang1033 - "fall"; we cannot have *}{\b\lang1033 l\'e1nt\'eba}{\lang1033  paralleling }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1l\'eba}{
\lang1033  because a long vowel cannot occur in front of a consonant cluster)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\fs20\lang1033 NOTE (added September 2002): Some of my deductions above have been criticized by VT editor Carl F. Hostetter. No one disputes the fact that primary verbs form their present or "continuous" tense by lengthening the stem-vowel and adding -}
{\b\fs20\lang1033 a}{\fs20\lang1033 , but the notion that A-stems have present-tense forms in -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 \'eba}{\fs20\lang1033  has proved controversial. Of course, this is based on the one example }{\b\fs20\lang1033 \'f3r\'eba}{\fs20\lang1033 
 (from }{\b\fs20\lang1033 ora}{\fs20\lang1033 - "impel"), and it was Hostetter himself who published this form and suggested that this is an example of the present/continuous tense.  However, it may be that the idea of present-tense forms in -}{
\b\fs20\lang1033 \'eba}{\fs20\lang1033  represents merely a short-lived fluctuation in Tolkien's evolving conceptions. I have not changed any of the exercises below, but 
until we know more about Tolkien's precise intentions, writers may opt to avoid the present-tense forms in -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 \'eba}{\fs20\lang1033 
 in their own compositions. As we will discuss later, there is a way to work around this particular uncertainty.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par Some useful terms can be included here. Once you include a verb in the sentence, denoting some kind of }{\i\lang1033 action}{\lang1033 , you must normally devote another part of the sentence to telling who is }{\i\lang1033 doing}{\lang1033 
 this action. The party that }{\i\lang1033 does}{\lang1033  whatever the verb tells us is being done, constitutes the }{\i\lang1033 subject}{\lang1033  of the sentence. In a sentence like }{\b\lang1033 Isil s\'edla}{\lang1033 
 "the Moon is shining", it is thus }{\b\lang1033 Isil}{\lang1033  "the Moon" that is the subject, since it is the Moon that }{\i\lang1033 does}{\lang1033  the shining the verb }{\b\lang1033 s\'edla }{\lang1033 tells us about. In a sentence like }{
\b\lang1033 i Elda m\'e1ta}{\lang1033  "the Elf is eating", }{\b\lang1033 i Elda}{\lang1033  "the Elf" is the subject, since the Elf }{\i\lang1033 does the eating}{\lang1033 .}{\b\lang1033 
\par }{\lang1033 This very sentence, }{\b\lang1033 i Elda m\'e1ta}{\lang1033 , has possibilities. We can add one more element, like the noun }{\b\lang1033 massa}{\lang1033  "bread", and get }{\b\lang1033 i Elda m\'e1ta massa}{\lang1033 
 "the Elf is eating bread". Now what is the function of this added word? It is the "target" of the verbal action, in this case what is }{\i\lang1033 eaten}{\lang1033 . The target of the verbal action is called the }{\i\lang1033 object}{\lang1033 
, the passive counterpart of the active subject: The subject }{\i\lang1033 does}{\lang1033  something, but the object is what the subject }{\i\lang1033 does something to}{\lang1033 . Th
e subject "subjects" the object to some kind of action. This "action" may of course be much less dramatic than "subject }{\i\lang1033 eats}{\lang1033  object" as in the example above. For instance, it can be as subtle as in the sentence "the subject }{
\i\lang1033 sees}{\lang1033  the object" (fill in with o
ther sense-verbs if you like), where the "action" of the subject does not physically affect the object in any way. That is not the point here. The basic idea of the subject-object dichotomy is simply that the }{\i\lang1033 subject}{\lang1033 
 does something to the }{\i\lang1033 object}{\lang1033 , though "does something to" must sometimes be understood in a wider sense.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs20\lang1033 NOTE: Notice, though, that in sentences with the copula }{\b\fs20\lang1033 n\'e1}{\fs20\lang1033 /}{\b\fs20\lang1033 nar}{\fs20\lang1033  "is/are", for instance }{\b\fs20\lang1033 i alda n\'e1
 tasar}{\fs20\lang1033  "the tree is a willow", }{\b\fs20\lang1033 tasar}{\fs20\lang1033  "a willow" does }{\i\fs20\lang1033 not}{\fs20\lang1033  count as the object of }{\b\fs20\lang1033 i alda}{\fs20\lang1033  "the tree". }{\b\fs20\lang1033 I alda}{
\fs20\lang1033  is the }{\i\fs20\lang1033 subject}{\fs20\lang1033  all right, since this is the element that "does" what little action there is in this sentence: "the tree }{\i\fs20\lang1033 is}{\fs20\lang1033 ..." But }{\b\fs20\lang1033 tasar}{
\fs20\lang1033  "a willow" is not the object, for in this sentence "the tree" does not }{\i\fs20\lang1033 do}{\fs20\lang1033  anything to "a willow" \endash  and the ha
llmark of the object is that something is done to it. Rather than doing anything do a willow, the tree }{\i\fs20\lang1033 is}{\fs20\lang1033  a willow, and that is another thing altogether: }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Tasar}{\fs20\lang1033  is here the }{
\i\fs20\lang1033 predicate}{\fs20\lang1033  of }{\b\fs20\lang1033 i alda}{\fs20\lang1033 , as we discussed in the previous lesson. But if we substitute }{\b\fs20\lang1033 m\'e1ta}{\fs20\lang1033  "is eating" for }{\b\fs20\lang1033 n\'e1}{\fs20\lang1033 
 "is", we are right back to a subject-verb-object construction: }{\b\fs20\lang1033 I alda m\'e1ta tasar}{\fs20\lang1033 , "the tree is eating a willow". If you are unduly troubled by the fact that this sounds somewhat nonsensical, rest assured that the }{
\i\fs20\lang1033 grammar}{\fs20\lang1033  is fine.
\par }{\lang1033 
\par In the case of some verbs, there can be no object. In the case of (say) }{\b\lang1033 lanta}{\lang1033 - "to fall", you can have a subject and say }{\b\lang1033 i Elda lant\'eba}{\lang1033  "the Elf is falling". Here the subject doesn't do anything }{
\i\lang1033 to}{\lang1033  an object; it is just the subject itself that is doing something. With a verb like }{\b\lang1033 mat}{\lang1033 - "eat", it is kind of optional if you want to fill out the sentence with an object or not: }{\b\lang1033 I Elda m
\'e1ta}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 massa}{\lang1033 ), "the Elf is eating (bread)"; this works as a complete sentence even without the object. But some verbs by their meaning }{\i\lang1033 demand}{\lang1033 
 an object, and the sentence would be felt to be incomplete without it. If we say }{\b\lang1033 i Elda m\'e1p\'eba}{\lang1033  "the Elf is seizing", this only raises the question "the Elf is seizing }{\i\lang1033 what?}{\lang1033 
" and we must come up with an object to make the sentence complete.
\par 
\par In the Plotz letter, Tolkien indicated that in one variant of Quenya, so-called }{\i\lang1033 Book Quenya}{\lang1033 
, nouns would have a special form if they function as objects. Singular nouns ending in a vowel would have this vowel lengthened (for instance, }{\b\lang1033 cirya}{\lang1033  "ship" would become }{\b\lang1033 ciry\'e1}{\lang1033 
 if it appears as the object of a sentence), and nouns that normally employ the plural ending -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  would switch to -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  (so "ships", as object, would be }{\b\lang1033 ciryai}{\lang1033  instead of }{
\b\lang1033 ciryar}{\lang1033 ). This special "object" form, in linguistic terms the }{\i\lang1033 accusative}{\lang1033  case, was supposedly used in (archaic?) written Quenya. However, this accusative does not appear in any actual texts, such as }{
\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  or even the last version of the }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{\lang1033  poem, which must be almost contemporaneous with the Plotz letter. }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 , sung by Galadriel, is
 perhaps supposed to reflect the usage of spoken Third Age Quenya. Whatever the case, I do not use the distinct accusative in the exercises I have made for this course (or in my own Quenya compositions). It seems clear that the use of the accusative was f
ar from universal, within or without the fictional context. So I would say }{\b\lang1033 cirya}{\lang1033 (}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 ) for "ship(s)" even if the word appears as the object of a sentence.
\par  
\par With the terms subject and object in place, we can discuss another feature of the Quenya verb. Just like adjectives agree in number with the nouns they describe, }{\i\lang1033 verbs agree in number with their subjects}{\lang1033 
. Let us have a closer look at the first line of }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 lauri\'eb lantar lassi}{\lang1033  "like gold fall the leaves", or literally "golden fall [the] leaves". Here the adjective }{\b\lang1033 laur\'eba}{
\lang1033  "golden" appears in plural form }{\b\lang1033 lauri\'eb}{\lang1033  to agree in number with the plural noun }{\b\lang1033 lassi}{\lang1033  "leaves", as we discussed in the previous lesson. But the verb }{\b\lang1033 lanta}{\lang1033 
- "to fall" must also agree with its plural subject }{\b\lang1033 lassi}{\lang1033 . The verb }{\b\lang1033 lanta}{\lang1033  therefore takes the ending -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 . (The verb itself appears in the so-called }{\i\lang1033 aorist}{
\lang1033  tense, to be discussed later; you can think of aorist }{\b\lang1033 lantar}{\lang1033  vs. present tense }{\b\lang1033 lant\'ebar}{\lang1033  as corresponding to English "fall" vs. "are falling", respectively. Some would consider a form like }{
\b\lang1033 lant\'ebar}{\lang1033  speculative, but }{\b\lang1033 lantar}{\lang1033  is directly attested in Tolkien's writings.) The plural ending -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  we have already met in the case of nouns, as in }{\b\lang1033 Eldar}{
\lang1033  "Elves", but nouns may also have plurals in -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 , depending on their shape. In the case of verbs, the plural ending -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  seems to be universal, no matter what the verb looks like. The ending -}{
\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  is not restricted to the present tense of verbs, but is seemingly used in all tenses, wherever a plural subject turns up. 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Essentially we have already met the verbal plural ending in the verb }{\b\lang1033 nar}{\lang1033  "are", the plural of }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033  "is". (One may ask why }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{
\lang1033  does not turn into ?}{\b\lang1033 n\'e1r}{\lang1033  with the long vowel intact. The latter form may very well turn out to be valid, but }{\b\lang1033 nar}{\lang1033  "are" with a short }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 
 is at least less prone to confusion with the noun }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1r}{\lang1033  "flame".)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab More than one subject has the same effect on the verb as a (single) plural subject, the verb taking the ending -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  in both instances:
\par \tab 
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 I arani m\'e1tar}{\lang1033  "the kings are eating" (sg. }{\b\lang1033 i aran m\'e1ta}{\lang1033  "the king is eating")
\par 
\par }\pard \li708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\lang1033 I aran ar i t\'e1ri m\'e1tar}{\lang1033  "the king and the queen are eating" (if you want the verb }{\b\lang1033 mat}{\lang1033 - "eat" to appear in singular present-tense form }{\b\lang1033 m
\'e1ta}{\lang1033  here, you must get rid of either the king or the queen so that there is just a single subject)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par On the other hand, it has no effect on the verb if we have a plural}{\i\lang1033  object}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 multiple }{\lang1033 objects, e.g. }{\b\lang1033 i aran m\'e1ta massa ar apsa}{\lang1033  "the king is eating bread and meat" (}{
\b\lang1033 apsa}{\lang1033  "cooked food, meat"). The verb agrees in number with the subject only.
\par \tab It has generally been assumed that the verb has only one plural form, the ending -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  being universal. In other words, the verb would take the ending -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 
 not only where the subject noun appears in the "normal" plural (ending -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 ), but also where it is dual (ending -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 
) or appears in the "partitive plural" form (ending -}{\b\lang1033 li}{\lang1033 ). However, we have no actual examples from LotR-style Quenya, and in particular I will not rule out the possibility that there may be a special }{\i\lang1033 dual}{
\lang1033  form of the verb to go with dual subjects (ending -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  as for most nouns, like }{\b\lang1033 Aldu s\'edlat}{\lang1033  rather than }{\b\lang1033 Aldu s\'edlar}{\lang1033 
 for "the Two Trees are shining"???) The published material allows no certain conclusion in this question, so I will simply avoid dual subjects in the exercises I make for this course.
\par 
\par The last thing we must consider when discussing the verb is the question of }{\i\lang1033 word order}{\lang1033 
. Where in the sentence does the verb fit in, really? English sentences generally list the subject, the verb and the object (if there is any object) in that order. The attentive reader will have noticed that most of the Quen
ya sentences above are organized in the same manner. This seems to be the }{\i\lang1033 most typical}{\lang1033  word order in Quenya prose. Examples of the subject and the verb in that order include }{\b\lang1033 lassi lantar}{\lang1033 
 "leaves fall" and }{\b\lang1033 morni\'eb caita}{\lang1033  "darkness lies [upon the foaming waves]" \endash  both from the prose version of }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 
. But there are also examples of the verb being placed first, e.g. Fingon's cry before the Nirnaeth Arnoediad: }{\b\lang1033 Auta i l\'f3m\'eb!}{\lang1033 , literally "Passes the night", but translated "the night is passing!" in the }{\i\lang1033 
Silmarillion}{\lang1033  ch. 20. Indeed both of the above-quoted examples of the order subject-verb from the prose }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  instead show the order verb-subject in the poetic version in LotR: }{\b\lang1033 lantar lassi}{
\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 caita morni\'eb}{\lang1033 . In English, fronting the verb is one way of turning a declarat
ive statement into a question, e.g. "Elves are beautiful" vs. "are Elves beautiful?", but this way of forming questions evidently doesn't work in Quenya. (}{\b\lang1033 Auta i l\'f3m\'eb!}{\lang1033 
 "passes the night!" for "the night is passing!" is perhaps an example of dramatic style 
or affectionate speech; the verbal action is evidently considered more important than the subject that performs it. I suspect that in a less dramatic context, one would rather say }{\b\lang1033 i l\'f3m\'eb auta}{\lang1033 .)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  also provides an example of a sentence with both subject, verb and object: }{\b\lang1033 h\'edsi\'eb unt\'fapa Calaciryo m\'edri}{\lang1033 , "mist }{\i\lang1033 
[subject] }{\lang1033 covers }{\i\lang1033 [verb]}{\lang1033  the jewels of Calacirya }{\i\lang1033 [this whole phrase being the object]}{\lang1033 ". Yet word order is again quite flexible, especially in poetry, as further examples from }{\i\lang1033 Nam
\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  shows. We have object-subject-verb in the sentence }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1ryat Elent\'e1ri ortan\'eb}{\lang1033 
, literally "her hands (the) Starqueen raised" (in LotR translated "the Queen of the stars...has uplifted her hands"). The sentence }{\b\lang1033 ily\'eb tier undul\'e1v\'eb lumbul\'eb}{\lang1033 , literally "all paths downlicked}{\i\lang1033  (i.e. cov
ered)}{\lang1033  shadow", has the order object-verb-subject (in LotR, Tolkien used the translation "all paths are drowned deep in shadow"). In the prose version of }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 
, Tolkien interestingly reorganized both of these to subject-verb-object constructions: }{\b\lang1033 Elent\'e1ri ortan\'eb m\'e1ryat}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 lumbul\'eb undul\'e1v\'eb ily\'eb tier}{\lang1033 
. This is our main basis for assuming that this is the normal order, preferred where there are no poetic or dramatic considerations to be made. 
\par In general, one must be careful about putting the object before the subject, for this could in some cases cause confusion as to which word }{\i\lang1033 is}{\lang1033 
 the object and which is the subject (since the commonest form of Quenya does not maintain a distinct accusative case to mark the object). Such inversions are however quite permissible
 when the subject is singular and the object is plural or vice versa. Then the verb, agreeing in number with the subject only, will indirectly identify it. In the sentence }{\b\lang1033 ily\'eb tier undul\'e1v\'eb lumbul\'eb}{\lang1033 
 we can readily tell that it must be }{\b\lang1033 lumbul\'eb}{\lang1033  "shadow" and not }{\b\lang1033 ily\'eb tier}{\lang1033  "all paths" that is the subject, because the verb }{\b\lang1033 undul\'e1v\'eb}{\lang1033  does }{\i\lang1033 not}{\lang1033 
 receive the ending -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  to agree with the plural word }{\b\lang1033 tier}{\lang1033 . Hence this can't be the subject \endash  but the singular noun }{\b\lang1033 lumbul\'eb}{\lang1033  "shadow" can.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang1033 MORE ABOUT ADJECTIVES
\par }{\lang1033 In English and other European languages, adjectives have special forms that are used in }{\i\lang1033 comparison}{\lang1033 . In English, adjectives have a }{\i\lang1033 comparative}{\lang1033  form that is constructed by adding the ending -}{
\i\lang1033 er}{\lang1033 , and a }{\i\lang1033 superlative}{\lang1033  form that is formed with the ending -}{\i\lang1033 est}{\lang1033 . For instance, the adjective }{\i\lang1033 tall}{\lang1033  has the comparative form }{\i\lang1033 taller}{
\lang1033  and the superlative form }{\i\lang1033 tallest}{\lang1033 . (In the case of some adjectives, English however resorts to the independent words }{\i\lang1033 more}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 most}{\lang1033  instead of using the endings, e.g. }
{\i\lang1033 more intelligent}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 most intelligent}{\lang1033  instead of }{\i\lang1033 intelligenter}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 intelligentest}{\lang1033 
, which forms are perceived as cumbersome.) The function of these forms is to facilitate }{\i\lang1033 comparison}{\lang1033  between various parties. If we want to say that one party possesses the quality described by the adjective to a greater
 extent than some other party, we may use the comparative form: "Peter is }{\i\lang1033 taller}{\lang1033 
 than Paul." The superlative form is used if we want to say that one party possesses the quality in question more than all others that are considered: "Peter is the }{\i\lang1033 tallest}{\lang1033  boy in the class."
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
In the first version of this Quenya lesson, as published in December 2000, I wrote: "But when it comes to Quenya, there is not much we can say. The published material includes absolutely no information about comparative forms; we don't even
 have an independent word for 'more'." Since then, the situation has happily changed; during 2001 a little more information appeared in the journals }{\i\lang1033 Tyali\'eb Tyelelli\'e9va}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 Vinyar Tengwar}{\lang1033 
. Now we do have a word for "more" (}{\b\lang1033 malda}{\lang1033 ), and we also know a special formula that is used in comparison: "A is brighter than B" may be expressed as "A }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1 calima l\'e1}{\lang1033 
 B", literally "A is bright beyond B" (VT42:32). However, the word }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033  has other meanings beside "beyond", and it will be more practical to discuss and practice its use in comparison in a later lesson ("The various uses of }{
\i\lang1033 l\'e1}{\lang1033 ", Lesson Eighteen).
\par We will here focus on the }{\i\lang1033 superlative}{\lang1033  form of adjectives instead. It is somewhat disquieting to notice that when Tolkien was making a Quenya translation of the Litany of Lo
reto, he broke off before translating the Latin superlative form }{\i\lang1033 purissima}{\lang1033  "most pure" \endash 
 as if he himself was not quite certain how to render it (VT44:19). Yet one tiny scrap of evidence regarding the superlative has long been available: In Letters:278-279, Tolkien explained the adjectival form }{\b\lang1033 ancalima}{\lang1033 
 occurring in LotR. Translating it as "exceedingly bright", he stated that this is }{\b\lang1033 calima}{\lang1033  "shining brilliant" with the element }{\b\lang1033 an}{\lang1033 
- added, the latter being a "superlative or intensive prefix". For this reason, many writers have used the prefix }{\b\lang1033 an}{\lang1033 - as the equivalent of the English ending -}{\i\lang1033 est}{\lang1033 
, to construct the superlative form of adjectives \endash  e.g. }{\b\lang1033 anvanya}{\lang1033  "fairest" from }{\b\lang1033 vanya}{\lang1033  "fair, beautiful" (but is should be understood that }{\b\lang1033 ancalima}{\lang1033  remains our sole }{
\i\lang1033 attested}{\lang1033  example of }{\b\lang1033 an}{\lang1033 - used in this sense).
\par One may wonder whether the form that is made by prefixing }{\b\lang1033 an}{\lang1033 - really is the equivalent of an English superlative, sc. a form of the adjective that implies having the most of the property involved }{\i\lang1033 
in comparison with certain others}{\lang1033 . It may be noted that Tolkien translated }{\b\lang1033 ancalima}{\lang1033 , not as "brightest", but as "exceedingly bright". When he describes }{\b\lang1033 an}{\lang1033 
- as a "superlative or intensive prefix", he may almost seem to mean 'superlative }{\i\lang1033 or rather}{\lang1033  intensive prefix'. So perhaps }{\b\lang1033 an}{\lang1033 - 
implies "very, exceedingly" rather than "most" in comparison with others. It may be noted, though, that the context the in which the word is found does seem to imply a certain amount of "comparison": In LotR, }{\b\lang1033 ancalima}{\lang1033 
 occurs as part of Frodo's "speaking in tongues" in Shelob's lair (volume 2, Book Four, chapter IX): }{\b\lang1033 Aiya E\'e4rendil Elenion Ancalima}{\lang1033 . No translation is given in the LotR itself, but Tolkien later stated that this means "hail E
\'e4rendil brightest of stars" (Letters:385). In Tolkien's mythology, E\'e4r
endil carrying the shining Silmaril was set in the heavens as the brightest of the stars. So here, the meaning does seem to be that of a genuine superlative, "brightest" in the full sense of "brighter than all the others". In any case, no other informatio
n on how to form the superlative appears in published writings, so we have little choice but to use this formation. We must however be prepared that future publications may provide more information about this, involving alternative superlative formations.

\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab The prefix }{\b\lang1033 an}{\lang1033 - in this form cannot be mechanically prefixed to }{\i\lang1033 any}{\lang1033 
 Quenya adjective, or consonant clusters that Quenya does not allow would sometimes result. }{\b\lang1033 An}{\lang1033 - can be prefixed "as is" to adjectives beginning in a vowel or in }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033 -, }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 -, }{
\b\lang1033 qu}{\lang1033 -, }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 -, }{\b\lang1033 v}{\lang1033 -, }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033 -, and }{\b\lang1033 y}{\lang1033 -: 
\par 
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 an}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 alta}{\lang1033  "great (in size)" = }{\b\lang1033 analta}{\lang1033  "greatest"
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 an}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 calima}{\lang1033  "bright" = }{\b\lang1033 ancalima}{\lang1033  "brightest" (our sole attested example!)
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 an}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 norna}{\lang1033  "tough" = }{\b\lang1033 annorna}{\lang1033  "toughest" 
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 an}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 quanta}{\lang1033  "full" = }{\b\lang1033 anquanta}{\lang1033  "fullest"
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 an}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 vanya}{\lang1033  "beautiful" = }{\b\lang1033 anvanya}{\lang1033  "most beautiful"
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 an}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 wenya}{\lang1033  "green" = }{\b\lang1033 anwenya}{\lang1033  "greenest"
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 an}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 y\'e1ra}{\lang1033  "old" = }{\b\lang1033 any\'e1ra}{\lang1033  "oldest"
\par 
\par Perhaps we can also include adjectives in }{\b\lang1033 f}{\lang1033 - and }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033 - (no examples):
\par 
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 an}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 f\'e1na}{\lang1033  "white" = ?}{\b\lang1033 anf\'e1na}{\lang1033  "whitest"
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 an}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 halla}{\lang1033  "tall" = ?}{\b\lang1033 anhalla}{\lang1033  "tallest"
\par 
\par What would happen in other cases we cannot say for certain. Either an extra vowel (likely }{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 
) would be inserted between the prefix and the adjective to break up what would otherwise be an impossible cluster, or the final -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  of the prefix would change, becoming more similar (o
r wholly similar) to the first consonant of the adjective. Such }{\i\lang1033 assimilation}{\lang1033  is observed elsewhere in our corpus, so this has to be our favourite theory regarding the behavior of }{\b\lang1033 an}{\lang1033 
- as well. Before the consonant }{\b\lang1033 p}{\lang1033 -, the }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  of }{\b\lang1033 an}{\lang1033  would likely be pronounced with the lips closed because the pronunciation of }{\b\lang1033 p}{\lang1033 
 involves such a closure; hence }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  would turn into }{\b\lang1033 m}{\lang1033 . (Compare English }{\i\lang1033 input}{\lang1033  often being pronounced }{\i\lang1033 imput}{\lang1033 .) From }{\b\lang1033 pitya}{\lang1033 
 "small" we would thus have }{\b\lang1033 ampitya}{\lang1033  for "smallest", this being the impossible word }{\b\lang1033 anpitya}{\lang1033  reworked into a permissible form (Quenya does not have }{\b\lang1033 np}{\lang1033 , but the cluster }{
\b\lang1033 mp}{\lang1033  is frequent even in unitary words).
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Before the consonants }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 -, }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 -, }{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 -, and }{\b\lang1033 m}{\lang1033 -, the final }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  of }{
\b\lang1033 an}{\lang1033 - would probably be fully assimilated, that is, it becomes identical to the following consonant:
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\lang1033 an }{\lang1033 + }{\b\lang1033 lauca}{\lang1033  "warm" = }{\b\lang1033 allauca}{\lang1033  "warmest"
\par }{\b\lang1033 an}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 ringa}{\lang1033  "cold" = }{\b\lang1033 arringa}{\lang1033  "coldest"
\par }{\b\lang1033 an}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 sarda}{\lang1033  "hard" = }{\b\lang1033 assarda}{\lang1033  "hardest"
\par }{\b\lang1033 an}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 moina}{\lang1033  "dear" = }{\b\lang1033 ammoina}{\lang1033  "dearest"
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par Cf. such attested assimilations as }{\b\lang1033 nl}{\lang1033  becoming }{\b\lang1033 ll}{\lang1033  in the compound }{\b\lang1033 N\'famell\'f3t\'eb}{\lang1033  "Flower of the West" (UT:227, transparently a compound of the well-known words }{
\b\lang1033 n\'famen}{\lang1033  "west" and }{\b\lang1033 l\'f3t\'eb}{\lang1033  "flower"). As for the group }{\b\lang1033 nm}{\lang1033  becoming }{\b\lang1033 mm}{\lang1033 , this development is seen in the name of the Vanyarin Elf }{\b\lang1033 Elemm
\'edr\'eb}{\lang1033  mentioned in the }{\i\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\lang1033 : his (her?) name apparently means "Star-jewel" (}{\b\lang1033 elen}{\lang1033  "star" + }{\b\lang1033 m\'edr\'eb}{\lang1033  "jewel").
\par 
\par }{\i\cf2\lang1033 Summary of Lesson Five:}{\lang1033  Two major categories of Quenya verbs are the }{\i\lang1033 primary}{\lang1033  verbs, that represent a primitive root with no additions, and the }{\i\lang1033 A-stems}{\lang1033 
, that have added an ending including the vowel }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  to the original root (sometimes -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  alone, but more commonly some longer ending like -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033 
). The primary verbs form their present tense by lengthening the stem-vowel and adding -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 , e.g. }{\b\lang1033 s\'edla}{\lang1033  "is shining" from }{\b\lang1033 sil}{\lang1033 - "to shine". The A-stems form their prese
nt tense by somewhat the same rule, but when the ending -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  is added to such a stem (already ending in -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 ), what would be -}{\b\lang1033 aa}{\lang1033  is changed to -}{\b\lang1033 \'eba}{\lang1033 
. In our one attested example of what may be the present tense of an A-stem, }{\b\lang1033 \'f3r\'eba}{\lang1033  from }{\b\lang1033 ora}{\lang1033 - "to impel", the stem-v
owel has been lengthened. However, as far as we understand Quenya phonology, a long vowel cannot normally occur in front of a consonant cluster, and most A-stems do have a consonant cluster following the stem-vowel (e.g. }{\b\lang1033 la}{\b\ul\lang1033 
nt}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 - "to fall", }{\b\lang1033 hi}{\b\ul\lang1033 ly}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 - "to follow"). Presumably such verbs would form their present tense in -}{\b\lang1033 \'eba}{\lang1033 
, but the stem-vowel would remain short. Only the (relatively few) A-stems that do }{\i\lang1033 not}{\lang1033  have a consonant cluster following the stem-vowel can lengthen it in the present tense. }{\i\lang1033 (NOTE: Some consid
er all present-tense forms in -}{\b\i\lang1033 \'eba}{\i\lang1033  speculative, and students should understand that given the scarcity of source material, new publications may significantly alter the picture.
 The use of such forms in the exercises below should be considered tentative reconstruction or extrapolation, not necessarily "Tolkien fact".) }{\lang1033 \endash  A verb agrees with its subject in }{\i\lang1033 number}{\lang1033 , receiving the ending -}
{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  if the subject is plural: }{\b\lang1033 elen s\'edla}{\lang1033  "a star is shining", }{\b\lang1033 eleni s\'edlar}{\lang1033  "stars are shining".
\par \tab A }{\i\lang1033 superlative}{\lang1033  form of adjectives can be derived by adding the prefix }{\b\lang1033 an}{\lang1033 -, as in }{\b\lang1033 ancalima}{\lang1033  "brightest" from }{\b\lang1033 calima}{\lang1033 
 "bright". We must, however, assume that the }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  of this prefix is in many cases assimilated to the first consonant of the adjective, or consonant clusters that Quenya phonology does not allow would arise. For instance, }{
\b\lang1033 an}{\lang1033 - + }{\b\lang1033 lauca}{\lang1033  "warm" may produce }{\b\lang1033 allauca}{\lang1033  for "warmest" (*}{\b\lang1033 anlauca}{\lang1033  being an impossible word).
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang1033 VOCABULARY
\par }{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 canta}{\lang1033  "four"
\par }{\b\lang1033 Nauco}{\lang1033  "Dwarf"
\par }{\b\lang1033 parma}{\lang1033  "book"
\par }{\b\lang1033 tiuca}{\lang1033  "thick, fat"
\par }{\b\lang1033 mapa}{\lang1033 - verb "grasp, seize"
\par }{\b\lang1033 tir}{\lang1033 - verb "watch, guard"
\par }{\b\lang1033 lala}{\lang1033 - verb "laugh" }{\fs20\lang1033 (so according to a late source, PM:359; in earlier material the verb }{\b\fs20\lang1033 lala}{\fs20\lang1033 -, of a quite different derivation, has the meaning "deny": See the entry }{
\i\fs20\lang1033 LA}{\fs20\lang1033  in the }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Etymologies}{\fs20\lang1033 . We needn't discuss whether one obsoletes the other; here we will use }{\b\fs20\lang1033 lala}{\fs20\lang1033 - for "laugh" only.)}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 caita}{\lang1033 - verb "lie" }{\fs20\lang1033 (lie horizontally, not "tell a lie")}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 tulta}{\lang1033 - verb "summon"
\par }{\b\lang1033 linda}{\lang1033 - verb "sing" }{\fs20\lang1033 (cf. the word }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Ainu}{\b\fs20\ul\lang1033 linda}{\b\fs20\lang1033 l\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  or "Music [lit. Singing] of the Ainur") }{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 mat}{\lang1033 -  verb "eat"
\par }{\b\lang1033 cenda}{\lang1033 - verb "read"
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang1033 EXERCISES
\par }{\lang1033 
\par 1. Translate into English:
\par 
\par }{\i\lang1033 A.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 I n\'eds l\'e1l\'eba.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 B.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 I antiuca Nauco m\'e1ta.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 C.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 I t\'e1ri t\'edra i aran.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 D.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 I analta oron n\'e1 taura.
\par }{\i\lang1033 E.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 I n\'e9r tult\'eba i anvanya vend\'eb.
\par }{\i\lang1033 F.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 I aiw\'eb lind\'eba.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 G.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 I Naucor m\'e1p\'ebar i canta Eldar.
\par }{\i\lang1033 H}{\lang1033 . }{\b\lang1033 I antaura aran n\'e1 saila.
\par }{\lang1033 
\par 2. Translate into Quenya:
\par 
\par }{\i\lang1033 I.}{\lang1033  The woman is watching the greatest (/biggest) ship.}{\i\lang1033  
\par J.}{\lang1033  The most evil (/evilest) men are dead.
\par }{\i\lang1033 K}{\lang1033 . The Elf is seizing the book.
\par }{\i\lang1033 L}{\lang1033 . Four men are lying under a tree.
\par }{\i\lang1033 M}{\lang1033 . The wisest Elf is reading a book }{\fs20\lang1033 (}{\i\fs20\lang1033 careful}{\fs20\lang1033 : what probably happens to the superlative prefix when it is added to a word like }{\b\fs20\lang1033 saila}{\fs20\lang1033  "wise"?)
}{\i\lang1033 
\par N}{\lang1033 . The king and the queen are reading the book.}{\i\lang1033 
\par O}{\lang1033 . The birds are singing.
\par }{\i\lang1033 P}{\lang1033 . The four Dwarves are watching a bird.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\i\lang1033 Lessons 6-10 may be downloaded from this URL:}{\lang1033 
\par http://www.uib.no/People/hnohf/less-b.rtf
\par }}