{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff0\deflang1033\deflangfe1044{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f2\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 02070309020205020404}Courier New;}{\f3\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05050102010706020507}Symbol;}{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Times;}
{\f5\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Helvetica;}{\f6\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Courier;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Geneva;}
{\f8\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Tms Rmn;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Helv;}{\f10\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Serif;}
{\f11\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Sans Serif;}{\f12\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}New York;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}System;}
{\f14\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05000000000000000000}Wingdings;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604030504040204}Tahoma;}{\f16\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020404030301010803}Garamond;}
{\f17\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05020603050405020304}Times New Roman Special G1;}{\f18\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Marlett;}{\f19\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Reference 1;}
{\f20\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Reference 2;}{\f21\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05020603050405020304}Times New Roman Special G2;}{\f22\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0506020202030204}Arial Narrow;}
{\f23\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0a04020102020204}Arial Black;}{\f24\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02050604050505020204}Bookman Old Style;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0806030902050204}Impact;}
{\f26\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 050b0604020202020204}Arial Special G1;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 050b0604020202020204}Arial Special G2;}{\f28\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 050b0506020202030204}Arial Narrow Special G1;}
{\f29\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 050b0506020202030204}Arial Narrow Special G2;}{\f30\fscript\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 030f0702030302020204}Comic Sans MS;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604030504040204}Verdana;}
{\f32\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Angerthas;}{\f33\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Angerthas Moria;}{\f34\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0500000000000000}Tengwar Quenya;}
{\f35\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0500000000000000}Tengwar Sindarin;}{\f36\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0500000000000000}AngloSaxon Runes;}{\f37\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000400000000000000}Tengwar Parmaite;}
{\f38\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}GillSans;}{\f129\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Tahoma CE;}{\f130\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Tahoma Cyr;}{\f132\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Tahoma Greek;}{\f133\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Tahoma Tur;}
{\f134\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Tahoma Baltic;}{\f135\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Garamond CE;}{\f136\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Garamond Cyr;}{\f138\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Garamond Greek;}{\f139\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Garamond Tur;}
{\f140\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Garamond Baltic;}{\f171\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial Narrow CE;}{\f172\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Narrow Cyr;}{\f174\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Narrow Greek;}{\f175\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Narrow Tur;}
{\f176\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Narrow Baltic;}{\f177\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial Black CE;}{\f178\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Black Cyr;}{\f180\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Black Greek;}{\f181\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Black Tur;}
{\f182\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Black Baltic;}{\f183\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Bookman Old Style CE;}{\f184\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Bookman Old Style Cyr;}{\f186\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Bookman Old Style Greek;}
{\f187\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Bookman Old Style Tur;}{\f188\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Bookman Old Style Baltic;}{\f189\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Impact CE;}{\f190\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Impact Cyr;}{\f192\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Impact Greek;}
{\f193\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Impact Tur;}{\f194\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Impact Baltic;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\info{\title LESSON SIX}{\author Helge K\'e5re Fauskanger}{\operator Helge K\'e5re Fauskanger}{\creatim\yr2001\mo8\dy7\min43}
{\revtim\yr2002\mo9\dy28\hr18\min49}{\version8}{\edmins139}{\nofpages61}{\nofwords25695}{\nofchars146462}{\*\company  }{\nofcharsws179865}{\vern73}}\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl1417\margr1417\margt1417\margb1417 
\deftab708\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphhotz425\hyphcaps0\formshade\viewkind4\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot \fet0\sectd \linex0\headery709\footery709\colsx709\endnhere\sectdefaultcl {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9
\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid {\b\fs36\cf6\lang1033 LESSON SIX}{\b\fs32\cf6\lang1033 
\par }{\b\fs32\lang1033 Past tense 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par The previous lesson discussed the Quenya }{\i\lang1033 present}{\lang1033 
 tense, which is typically used to describe an on-going present action. However, Quenya has different tenses covering the entire trinity of past, present and future, and when recounting past events one will normally use the }{\i\lang1033 past}{\lang1033 
 tense.
\par \tab In English, very many past tenses are formed by means of the ending -}{\i\lang1033 ed}{\lang1033 , e.g. }{\i\lang1033 filled}{\lang1033  as the past tense of the verb }{\i\lang1033 fill}{\lang1033 
. In Quenya, most past tense forms are likewise formed by means of an ending added to the verbal stem. As far as we know, all past tense verbs end in the vowel -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  (though further endings, such as the plural ending -}{
\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  that is used in the case of a plural subject, may of course be added after this vowel). In many cases, this vowel -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  is part of the ending -}{\b\lang1033 n\'eb}{\lang1033 
, that seems to be the most general past tense ending in Quenya.
\par \tab As discussed in the previous lesson, most Quenya verbs are }{\i\lang1033 A-stems}{\lang1033 , meaning that they end in the vowel -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 . The past tenses of these verbs are typically formed simply by adding the ending -}{
\b\lang1033 n\'eb}{\lang1033 . For instance, the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033  mention a verb }{\b\lang1033 orta}{\lang1033 - "raise" (see the entry }{\i\lang1033 ORO}{\lang1033 ), and in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 
 in LotR its past tense is seen to be }{\b\lang1033 ortan\'eb}{\lang1033 . (The simplest translation of }{\b\lang1033 ortan\'eb}{\lang1033  is of course "raised"; the somewhat free rendering in LotR 
employs the translation "has uplifted" instead, but Tolkien's interlinear translation in RGEO:67 reads "lifted up" \endash  which is merely an alternative wording of "raised".) Other examples from Tolkien's notes:
\par \tab 
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 ora}{\lang1033 - "urge", past tense }{\b\lang1033 oran\'eb}{\lang1033  "urged" (VT41:13, 18)
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 hehta}{\lang1033 - "exclude", past tense }{\b\lang1033 hehtan\'eb}{\lang1033  "excluded" (WJ:365)
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 ulya}{\lang1033 - "pour", past tense }{\b\lang1033 ulyan\'eb}{\lang1033  "poured" (Etym, entry }{\i\lang1033 ULU}{\lang1033 )
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 sinta}{\lang1033 - "fade", past tense }{\b\lang1033 sintan\'eb}{\lang1033  "faded" (Etym, entry }{\i\lang1033 THIN}{\lang1033 )
\par 
\par We may add the verb }{\b\lang1033 ahyan\'eb}{\lang1033  "changed" (or "did change"), only attested like this in the past tense, as part of the question }{\b\lang1033 manen lamb\'eb Quendion ahyan\'eb[?]}{\lang1033 
 "how did the language of the Elves change?" (PM:395). The verb "change" would seem to be }{\b\lang1033 ahya}{\lang1033 -.
\par \tab Regarding the verb }{\b\lang1033 ava}{\lang1033 - (apparently meaning "refuse, forbid"), Tolkien noted that its past tense }{\b\lang1033 avan\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "revealed that it was not in origin a 'strong' or basic verbal stem". The latter seems to be more or less the same as a primary verb. He called }{\b\lang1033 avan\'eb}{\lang1033 
 a "weak" past tense form (WJ:370). That probably goes for all the past tenses so far discussed. (What Tolkien would call a "strong" past tense is not quite clear. Perhaps he would use this term of the past tenses formed by means of }{\i\lang1033 
nasal-infixion}{\lang1033  \endash  see below.)
\par \tab We must also consider the "basic" or "primary", ending-less verbs, verbs that unlike the A-stems do not have a final vowel: verbs like }{\b\lang1033 sil}{\lang1033 - "to shine", }{\b\lang1033 tir}{\lang1033 - "to watch", }{\b\lang1033 mat}{\lang1033 
- "to eat". 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 It seems that the ending -}{\b\lang1033 n\'eb}{\lang1033  can be used to form the past tense of some primary verbs as well. Tolkien mentioned }{\b\lang1033 tirn\'eb}{\lang1033 
 as the past tense of the verb }{\b\lang1033 tir}{\lang1033 - "to watch" (Etym, entry }{\i\lang1033 TIR}{\lang1033 ), and he also quoted }{\b\lang1033 tamn\'eb}{\lang1033  as the past tense of the verb }{\b\lang1033 tam}{\lang1033 - "to tap" (Etym, entry 
}{\i\lang1033 TAM}{\lang1033 ). In these cases, adding -}{\b\lang1033 n\'eb}{\lang1033  to the verbal stems in question does not produce impossible consonant clusters: Both }{\b\lang1033 rn}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 mn}{\lang1033  are 
permitted by Quenya phonology. For this reason, the ending -}{\b\lang1033 n\'eb}{\lang1033  can }{\i\lang1033 probably}{\lang1033  also be added to verbal stems ending in -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 , since double }{\b\lang1033 nn}{\lang1033 
 is likewise a wholly acceptable combination in Quenya. For instance, the past tense of the verb }{\b\lang1033 cen}{\lang1033 - "to see" is presumably }{\b\lang1033 cenn\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "saw", though we have no attested example of the past tense of a verb of this shape.
\par But whenever the stem of a basic verb ends in any consonant }{\i\lang1033 other}{\lang1033  than just -}{\b\lang1033 m}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 , or -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 , simply adding the ending -}{\b\lang1033 n\'eb}{\lang1033 
 would produce consonant clusters that Quenya cannot have. The past tense forms of verbs like }{\b\lang1033 mat}{\lang1033 - "eat", }{\b\lang1033 top}{\lang1033 - "cover" or }{\b\lang1033 tac}{\lang1033 - "fasten" cannot be **}{\b\lang1033 matn\'eb}{
\lang1033 , **}{\b\lang1033 topn\'eb}{\lang1033 , **}{\b\lang1033 tacn\'eb}{\lang1033 , for clusters like }{\b\lang1033 tn}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 pn}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 cn}{\lang1033  are not found in the language. So what happens? 
\par The difficult way of describing what occurs is to say that the }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  of the ending -}{\b\lang1033 n\'eb}{\lang1033  is replaced by }{\i\lang1033 nasal-infixion}{\lang1033 
 intruding before the last consonant of the verbal stem. What is "infixion"? We have already mentioned }{\i\lang1033 suffixes}{\lang1033 , elements added at the end of a word (like the plural ending -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 , added to the noun }{
\b\lang1033 Elda}{\lang1033  in its plural form }{\b\lang1033 Eldar}{\lang1033 ), and }{\i\lang1033 prefixes}{\lang1033 , elements added at the beginning of a word (like the superlative prefix }{\b\lang1033 an}{\lang1033 -, added to the adjective }{
\b\lang1033 calima}{\lang1033  "bright" in its superlative form }{\b\lang1033 ancalima}{\lang1033  "brightest"). If you want to add something to a word, there are only so many places you can fit it in; if it is not to be }{\i\lang1033 prefixed}{\lang1033 
 or }{\i\lang1033 suffixed}{\lang1033 , the final option is to }{\i\lang1033 infix}{\lang1033  it, that is, jam it }{\i\lang1033 into}{\lang1033  the word. For instance, the verb }{\b\lang1033 mat}{\lang1033 - "to eat" has the past tense }{\b\lang1033 
mant\'eb}{\lang1033  "ate" (VT39:7), an }{\i\lang1033 infixed}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  turning up before the final consonant of the verbal stem (}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  becoming }{\b\lang1033 nt}{\lang1033 ). Similarly, the verb }{
\b\lang1033 hat}{\lang1033 - "break asunder" has the past tense }{\b\lang1033 hant\'eb}{\lang1033  (Etym, entry }{\i\lang1033 SKAT}{\lang1033 ).
\par Before the consonant }{\b\lang1033 p}{\lang1033 , the infix takes the form }{\b\lang1033 m}{\lang1033  rather than }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 , so that the past tense of }{\b\lang1033 top}{\lang1033 - "to cover" is }{\b\lang1033 tomp\'eb}{\lang1033 
 (Etym, entry }{\i\lang1033 TOP}{\lang1033 ). Before }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033 , the infix appears as }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  (or actually }{\b\lang1033 \'f1}{\lang1033 , see below), so that the past tense of }{\b\lang1033 tac}{\lang1033 
- "to fasten" is }{\b\lang1033 tanc\'eb}{\lang1033  (Etym, entry }{\i\lang1033 TAK}{\lang1033 ). The various forms of the infix \endash  }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 m}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 \'f1}{\lang1033 
, depending on the environment \endash  are all }{\i\lang1033 nasals}{\lang1033 , sounds pronounced by making the stream of air from the lungs go out through the nose rather than the mouth. Hence }{\i\lang1033 nasal-infixion}{\lang1033 
 is a fitting term for this phonological process.
\par As I said, that was the difficult way of stating what happens. Put more simply: if adding the past tense ending -}{\b\lang1033 n\'eb}{\lang1033  to a primary verb would result in any of the impossible clusters }{\b\lang1033 tn}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 
cn}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 pn}{\lang1033 , the }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  and the consonant before it switch places. }{\b\lang1033 Tn}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 cn}{\lang1033  simply become }{\b\lang1033 nt}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 nc}{
\lang1033 ; what would be }{\b\lang1033 np}{\lang1033  changes to }{\b\lang1033 mp}{\lang1033  to ease pronunciation. (Actually what would be }{\b\lang1033 nc}{\lang1033  similarly changes to }{\b\lang1033 \'f1c}{\lang1033 , using }{\b\lang1033 \'f1}{
\lang1033  for }{\i\lang1033 ng}{\lang1033  as in }{\i\lang1033 king}{\lang1033  as Tolkien sometimes did \endash  but according to the spelling conventions here employed, }{\b\lang1033 \'f1c}{\lang1033  is represented simply as }{\b\lang1033 nc}{
\lang1033 .) Hence:
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 mat}{\lang1033 - "eat", past tense (**}{\i\lang1033 matn\'eb}{\lang1033  >) }{\b\lang1033 mant\'eb}{\lang1033  "ate"
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 top}{\lang1033 - "cover", past tense (**}{\i\lang1033 topn\'eb}{\lang1033  > **}{\i\lang1033 tonp\'eb}{\lang1033  >) }{\b\lang1033 tomp\'eb}{\lang1033  "covered"
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 tac}{\lang1033 - "fasten", past tense (**}{\i\lang1033 tacn\'eb}{\lang1033  >) }{\b\lang1033 tanc\'eb }{\lang1033 "fastened"
\par 
\par This, at least, is an easy way to imagine it for pedagogical purposes. We cannot know for certain whether Tolkien imagined this to be the actual development \endash  a form something like }{\b\lang1033 matn\'eb}{\lang1033 
 actually occurring at an earlier stage, but later becoming }{\b\lang1033 mant\'eb}{\lang1033  by swapping around the consonants }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 . The linguistic term for such transposing of two sounds is }{
\i\lang1033 metathesis}{\lang1033 , and there are other examples of metathesized consonants in the imaginary evolution of Tolkien's languages (see for instance the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 , entry }{\i\lang1033 KEL}{\lang1033 
-). However, some clues suggest that Tolkien imagined these past tenses to reflect "genuine" nasal-infixion occurring already in primitive Elvish, n
ot merely a later transposition of consonants. After all, he had one of his characters observe that "nasal-infixion is of considerable importance in Avallonian" (SD:433; Avallonian is another term for Quenya). But this is an academic question.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Primary verbs with -}{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033  as their final consonant must be given special attention. The verb }{\b\lang1033 vil}{\lang1033 - "to fly" is said to have the past tense }{
\b\lang1033 vill\'eb}{\lang1033  (Etym, entry }{\i\lang1033 WIL}{\lang1033 ). This double }{\b\lang1033 ll}{\lang1033  probably represents some combination of }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 . Perhaps }{\b\lang1033 vill\'eb}{
\lang1033  is meant to represent older }{\b\lang1033 wiln\'eb}{\lang1033  with the normal past tense ending (notice that in this case, }{\b\lang1033 v}{\lang1033  comes from older }{\b\lang1033 w}{\lang1033 : root }{\i\lang1033 WIL}{\lang1033 
), the group }{\b\lang1033 ln}{\lang1033  turning into }{\b\lang1033 ll}{\lang1033  in Quenya. However, other examples suggest that older }{\b\lang1033 ln}{\lang1033  would rather produce Quenya }{\b\lang1033 ld}{\lang1033 . It may well be that }{
\b\lang1033 vill\'eb }{\lang1033 is meant to represent older }{\b\lang1033 winl\'eb}{\lang1033 , that is, a nasal-infixed variant of the verb }{\b\lang1033 wil}{\lang1033 - (since }{\b\lang1033 nl}{\lang1033  also became }{\b\lang1033 ll}{\lang1033 
 in Quenya; for instance, the noun }{\b\lang1033 nell\'eb}{\lang1033  "brook" is said to come from older }{\i\lang1033 nen-le}{\lang1033 : Etym, entry }{\i\lang1033 NEN}{\lang1033 ). Whatever development Tolkien may have imagined, primary verbs with }{
\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033  as their final consonant seem to form their past tense form by adding -}{\b\lang1033 l\'eb}{\lang1033 .
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\fs20\lang1033 NOTE: In }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Telerin}{\fs20\lang1033 , the sister language of Quenya in the Blessed Realm, a verb formed from a root }{\i\fs20\lang1033 DEL}{\fs20\lang1033  ("go") is said to have the past tense }{\i\fs20\lang1033 delle}{
\fs20\lang1033 : WJ:364. As pointed out by Ales Bican, this form probably descends from older }{\i\fs20\lang1033 denle}{\fs20\lang1033  (with nasal-infixion). If it descended from }{\i\fs20\lang1033 delne}{\fs20\lang1033 
, it would likely have remained unchanged in Telerin, since the cluster }{\i\fs20\lang1033 ln}{\fs20\lang1033  is permitted in this language (cf. a Telerin word like }{\i\fs20\lang1033 elni}{\fs20\lang1033  "stars", WJ:362
). This observation supports the view that past tenses with nasal-infixion did occur already in Primitive Elvish.}{\b\fs20\lang1033 
\par }{\lang1033 
\par The system set out above is what I shall consider the "regular" way of forming the past tense of a verb in Quenya. That is, as long as a verb
 conforms with this system, I will not explicitly list its past tense when I first mention it. All the past tenses in the exercises below are constructed according to this system, so your task this time is to internalize the rules above. Some irregular fo
rms will be discussed in later lessons, but even so, we will here survey certain "alternative" past tense formations (contrasting them with the more regular forms may actually be helpful in memorizing the normal system \endash 
 but the student is not expected to memorize this survey as such). So do skim through as much as you can take of the stuff below, and proceed to the exercises when you've had enough.
\par \tab The past tense of primary verbs with -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  as their final consonant is relatively well-attested: Attested examples include }{\b\lang1033 car}{\lang1033 - "make, do", pa.t. }{\b\lang1033 carn\'eb}{\lang1033  (Etym, entry }{
\i\lang1033 KAR}{\lang1033 ),  }{\b\lang1033 tir}{\lang1033 - "watch", pa.t. }{\b\lang1033 tirn\'eb}{\lang1033  (Etym, entry }{\i\lang1033 TIR}{\lang1033 ) and }{\b\lang1033 tur}{\lang1033 - "govern", pa.t. }{\b\lang1033 turn\'eb}{\lang1033  (Etym, entry 
}{\i\lang1033 TUR}{\lang1033 ). So above we set out the rule that verbs of this shape have past tense forms that are constructed by adding the suffix -}{\b\lang1033 n\'eb}{\lang1033 . But a few verbs behave quite differently. The past tense of the verb }{
\b\lang1033 rer}{\lang1033 - "sow" is not **}{\b\lang1033 rern\'eb}{\lang1033  as we might expect, but }{\b\lang1033 rend\'eb}{\lang1033 : See Etym, entry }{\i\lang1033 RED}{\lang1033 
. The reason for this is precisely the fact that the original root-word was }{\i\lang1033 RED}{\lang1033  rather than **}{\i\lang1033 RER}{\lang1033 . Thus the verb }{\b\lang1033 rer}{\lang1033 - appeared as }{\b\lang1033 red}{\lang1033 
- at an earlier stage, and then the past tense }{\b\lang1033 rend\'eb}{\lang1033  is actually "regular" enough: it is simply formed from }{\b\lang1033 red}{\lang1033 - by means of nasal-infixion + the ending -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033 
 (just like such a regular verb as }{\b\lang1033 quet}{\lang1033 - "say" has the pa.t. }{\b\lang1033 quent\'eb}{\lang1033 ). What slightly complicates matters is that in Quenya, original }{\b\lang1033 d}{\lang1033  only survived as part of the clusters }{
\b\lang1033 ld}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 nd}{\lang1033 , and }{\b\lang1033 rd}{\lang1033 ; in all other positions it was changed, and following a vowel it normally became }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 . Hence }{\b\lang1033 red}{\lang1033 - turned into }{
\b\lang1033 rer}{\lang1033 -, while the past tense }{\b\lang1033 rend\'eb}{\lang1033 
 remained unscathed by the phonological changes. In this perspective, the verb is strictly speaking not "irregular" at all; it just behaves differently because it has a special history \endash  and this goes for very many of the "irregularities" in Qu
enya: As observed by his son, Tolkien's linguistic creations "imagine language not as 'pure structure', without 'before' or 'after', but as growth, in time" (LR:342). Tolkien clearly liked leaving in various testimonials to this imaginary age-long "growth
".
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 We don't know very many verbs in -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  that should have past tenses in -}{\b\lang1033 nd\'eb}{\lang1033  because of their special history. From the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies
}{\lang1033  we must presumably include the verbs }{\b\lang1033 hyar}{\lang1033 - "cleave" and }{\b\lang1033 ser}{\lang1033 - "rest" (since these come from roots }{\i\lang1033 SYAD}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 SED}{\lang1033 , see the relevan
t entries in Etym \endash  but Tolkien did not actually mention the past tense forms }{\b\lang1033 hyand\'eb}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 send\'eb}{\lang1033 ). In a post-LotR source we have a verb }{\b\lang1033 nir}{\lang1033 
- "press, thrust, force"; again no past tense form has been published, but since the stem is given as }{\i\lang1033 NID}{\lang1033  it should presumably be }{\b\lang1033 nind\'eb}{\lang1033  rather than }{\b\lang1033 nirn\'eb}{\lang1033 
 (VT41:17). More attested examples could be quoted from early "Qenya" material, but these writings do not have full authority as regards LotR-style Quenya. For instance, the 1915 Qenya Lexicon seems to include the verb }{\b\lang1033 nyar}{\lang1033 
- "tell, relate" in this category (past tense }{\b\lang1033 nyand\'eb}{\lang1033 , QL:68). But in later material, Tolkien derived this verb from a root }{\i\lang1033 NAR}{\lang1033  (entry }{\i\lang1033 NAR}{\i\lang1033\super 2}{\lang1033 
 in Etym) rather than }{\i\lang1033 NAD}{\lang1033 , so now its past tense would presumably be regular (}{\b\lang1033 nyarn\'eb}{\lang1033 ).
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab Some primary verbs are also seen to use a past tense formation that dispenses with any nasal sounds. The verb does receive the ending -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033 
, the vowel displayed by all past-tense forms, but instead of adding a nasal sound (infixed or as part of the ending -}{\b\lang1033 n\'eb}{\lang1033 ), the stem-vowel of the verb is }{\i\lang1033 lengthened}{\lang1033 
. For instance, the past tense of the verb }{\b\lang1033 lav}{\lang1033 - "lick" is seen to be }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1v\'eb}{\lang1033  (attested in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  as part of the verb }{\b\lang1033 undul\'e1v\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "down-licked", that is, "covered"). Likewise, the past tense of the negative verb }{\b\lang1033 um}{\lang1033 - "not do" or "not be" is said to be }{\b\lang1033 \'fam\'eb}{\lang1033  (Etym, entry }{\i\lang1033 UGU}{\lang1033 /}{\i\lang1033 UMU}{
\lang1033 ; we will return to this peculiar verb in Lesson Nine). This past tense formation is quite common in the early Qenya Lexicon, and it also turns up in relatively late (but still pre-LotR) sources. }{\i\lang1033 F\'edriel's Song}{\lang1033 
 of ca. 1936 agrees with the 1915 Lexicon that the past tense of the verb }{\b\lang1033 car}{\lang1033 - "make, do" is }{\b\lang1033 c\'e1r\'eb}{\lang1033  (QL:45, LR:72; the spelling used in the sources is }{\b\lang1033 k\'e1re}{\lang1033 
). However, according to the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033  (entry }{\i\lang1033 KAR}{\lang1033 ), the past tense is }{\b\lang1033 carn\'eb}{\lang1033  \endash  and that is the form we will use here: The }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 
 is, at least in part, slightly younger than Firiel's Song. Following the pattern of }{\b\lang1033 c\'e1r\'eb}{\lang1033 , some pre-LotR sources give }{\b\lang1033 t\'fal\'eb}{\lang1033  as the past tense of the verb }{\b\lang1033 tul}{\lang1033 
- "come" (LR:47, SD:246), but }{\b\lang1033 vill\'eb}{\lang1033  as the past tense of }{\b\lang1033 vil}{\lang1033 - in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033  suggests that the past tense "came" could just as well be }{\b\lang1033 tull\'eb}{\lang1033 
 (representing older }{\i\lang1033 tulne}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 tunle}{\lang1033 ) instead.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 It might seem that Tolkien eventually decided to limit the use of the past tense formation represented by }{\b\lang1033 t\'fal\'eb}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 c\'e1r\'eb}{\lang1033 
, though it was never wholly abandoned, as the form }{\b\lang1033 undul\'e1v\'eb}{\lang1033  in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  in LotR demonstrates. We might actually have expected the past tense of }{\b\lang1033 lav}{\lang1033 - "lick" to be **}
{\b\lang1033 lamb\'eb}{\lang1033  rather than }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1v\'eb}{\lang1033 . A past tense form }{\b\lang1033 lamb\'eb}{\lang1033  would be constructed by nasal-infixion of the original root-word }{\i\lang1033 LAB}{\lang1033  (itself lis
ted in Etym): In Quenya, original }{\b\lang1033 b}{\lang1033  normally became }{\b\lang1033 v}{\lang1033  following a vowel, but }{\b\lang1033 b}{\lang1033  persisted unchanged in the group }{\b\lang1033 mb}{\lang1033 . The Qenya Lexicon actually lists }{
\b\lang1033 amb\'eb}{\lang1033  as the past tense of a verb }{\b\lang1033 av}{\lang1033 - "depart" (QL:33); this may be an example of this phenomenon. However, **}{\b\lang1033 lamb\'eb}{\lang1033  as the past tense of }{\b\lang1033 lav}{\lang1033 
- would clash with the noun }{\b\lang1033 lamb\'eb}{\lang1033  "tongue, language"; perhaps this is why Tolkien decided to go for the irregular formation }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1v\'eb}{\lang1033  instead. Or should we generalize from }{\b\lang1033 lav}{
\lang1033 - and let }{\i\lang1033 all}{\lang1033  Quenya primary verbs in -}{\b\lang1033 v}{\lang1033  form their past tense after the pattern of }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1v\'eb}{\lang1033 ?
\par Luckily, these verbs are not very numerous. There is a distinct verb }{\b\lang1033 lav}{\lang1033 - meaning "yield, allow, grant" (root }{\i\lang1033 DAB}{\lang1033 , see Etym), possibly a verb }{\b\lang1033 tuv}{\lang1033 
- "find" (verbal stem isolated from a longer form), plus }{\b\lang1033 tyav}{\lang1033 - as the verb "taste" (see entry }{\i\lang1033 KYAB}{\lang1033  in Etym). Should the past tense "tasted" be }{\b\lang1033 tyamb\'eb}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 ty\'e1v
\'eb}{\lang1033 ? The latter past tense form is actually attested in the Qenya Lexicon (p. 49), but since the QL is seen to use this formation quite liberally compared to later Quenya, we c
annot be sure that the information is valid for the later stages of Tolkien's conception. (}{\b\lang1033 Ty\'e1v\'eb}{\lang1033  is attested in a post-LotR source as a }{\i\lang1033 noun}{\lang1033 
 "taste"; whether this argues against the same form being used as a past tense "tasted" is unclear. In the 1915 Lexicon, Tolkien did have similar-sounding nouns and verbal tenses coexisting; see QL:49, entry }{\i\lang1033 KUMU}{\lang1033 .)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab There are some curious cases where even longer, derived verbs (A-stems) }{\i\lang1033 drop their ending}{\lang1033  and have }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1v\'eb}{\lang1033 
-style past tenses derived directly from the ending-less root. One early example is the verb }{\b\lang1033 serta}{\lang1033 - "tie", past tense }{\b\lang1033 s\'e9r\'eb}{\lang1033  (QL:83) rather than **}{\b\lang1033 sertan\'eb}{\lang1033 
 as we might expect. These formations are far from uncommon in the 1915 Lexicon, but the idea was not wholly obsolete in later Quenya either: The }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033  of the mid-thirties records that the verb }{\b\lang1033 onta}{
\lang1033 - "beget, create" has two possible past tenses: beside the regular form }{\b\lang1033 ontan\'eb}{\lang1033  we also have the irregular form }{\b\lang1033 \'f3n\'eb}{\lang1033  (Etym, entry }{\i\lang1033 ONO}{\lang1033 ).
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 The simplest A-stems, those that add the short ending -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  to the root (and not a longer ending like -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033 
), may also drop this ending in some past tense formations. Above we quoted the QL form }{\b\lang1033 ty\'e1v\'eb}{\lang1033  as an attested past tense of the verb }{\b\lang1033 tyav}{\lang1033 
- "taste", but in the 1915 Lexicon, the verb "taste" is actually given as an A-stem }{\b\lang1033 tyava}{\lang1033 -: It is not a primary verb }{\b\lang1033 tyav}{\lang1033 - as it becomes in later sources (QL:49 vs. Etym, entry }{\i\lang1033 KYAB}{
\lang1033 ). Within the later system, we would expect an A-stem }{\b\lang1033 tyava}{\lang1033 - to have the past tense }{\b\lang1033 tyavan\'eb}{\lang1033 , but the validity of either form in LotR-style Quenya is highly quest
ionable. More commonly, the simplest A-stem verbs have past tenses that are "regular" enough \endash  if you pretend that the final -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  does not exist! Above we quoted }{\b\lang1033 oran\'eb}{\lang1033 
 as an example of the regular past tense of a simple A-stem verb (}{\b\lang1033 ora}{\lang1033 - "urge"), but immediately after writing }{\b\lang1033 oran\'eb}{\lang1033 , Tolkien actually added }{\b\lang1033 orn\'eb}{\lang1033 
 as a parenthetic alternative (VT41:13). Of course, }{\b\lang1033 orn\'eb}{\lang1033  would be a perfectly regular form if it were the past tense of a primary verb **}{\b\lang1033 or}{\lang1033 - (cf. for instance }{\b\lang1033 tur}{\lang1033 
- "govern", pa.t. }{\b\lang1033 turn\'eb}{\lang1033 ). In effect, }{\b\lang1033 ora}{\lang1033 -
 may behave as a primary verb in the past tense, discarding its ending and jumping over into another class. The earliest material has examples of the same phenomenon: In the QL, the past tense forms of the verbs }{\b\lang1033 papa}{\lang1033 
- "tremble" and }{\b\lang1033 pata}{\lang1033 - "rap, tap" are given as }{\b\lang1033 pamp\'eb}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 pant\'eb}{\lang1033  (p. 72), not **}{\b\lang1033 papan\'eb}{\lang1033 , **}{\b\lang1033 patan\'eb}{\lang1033 
 as we would expect according to the "regular" system. The nasal-infixed past tense forms would be perfectly "regular" if we assume that in the past tense, the simple A-stem verbs }{\b\lang1033 papa}{\lang1033 - and }{\b\lang1033 pata}{\lang1033 
- are masquerading as primary verbs **}{\b\lang1033 pap}{\lang1033 -, **}{\b\lang1033 pat}{\lang1033 -. Thus we cannot be certain whether the past tense of the verb }{\b\lang1033 mapa}{\lang1033 - "grasp, seize" should be }{\b\lang1033 mapan\'eb}{
\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 mamp\'eb}{\lang1033 ; writers have used both. Since Tolkien seems to imply that the past tense of }{\b\lang1033 ora}{\lang1033 - can be both }{\b\lang1033 oran\'eb}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 orn\'eb}{\lang1033 
, perhaps both are permissible. 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\fs20\lang1033 NOTE: In QL:59, Tolkien actually listed the past tense of }{\b\fs20\lang1033 mapa}{\fs20\lang1033 - as }{\b\fs20\lang1033 namp\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  (sic!) In the 1915 scenario, there were two variant roots, }{\i\fs20\lang1033 MAPA}{
\fs20\lang1033  and }{\i\fs20\lang1033 NAPA}{\fs20\lang1033 , that shared the past tense }{\b\fs20\lang1033 namp\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033 . Do we dare to assume that this idea was still valid decades later? The verb }{\b\fs20\lang1033 mapa}{\fs20\lang1033 
- is listed in the }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Etymologies}{\fs20\lang1033 , but if Tolkien had still imagined its past tense to be as irregular as }{\b\fs20\lang1033 namp\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033 
, I tend to think that it would have been explicitly mentioned in Etym as well. Furthermore, in Etym there is no trace of the alternative root }{\i\fs20\lang1033 NAPA}{\fs20\lang1033 ; we only find }{\i\fs20\lang1033 MAP}{\fs20\lang1033 
 (LR:371) corresponding to }{\i\fs20\lang1033 MAPA}{\fs20\lang1033  in the QL. But on the other hand, the form }{\b\fs20\lang1033 namp\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  is attested, so if you like it better than the unattested forms }{\b\fs20\lang1033 mapan\'eb}{
\fs20\lang1033  or }{\b\fs20\lang1033 mamp\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033 , feel free to use it.
\par 
\par }{\lang1033 The verb }{\b\lang1033 lala}{\lang1033 - "laugh" is another example of one of the simplest A-stems. It may have the past tense }{\b\lang1033 lalan\'eb}{\lang1033 
, but it is also possible that it should behave as a primary verb in the past tense. But if so, we must take into account the fact that }{\b\lang1033 lala}{\lang1033 - is to be derived from older }{\i\lang1033 g-lada-}{\lang1033 
 (PM:359); this is one of the cases where an original }{\b\lang1033 d}{\lang1033  following a vowel turned into }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033  rather than }{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  (influenced by the }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033  earlier in the word). So if 
}{\b\lang1033 lala}{\lang1033 - has a "short" past tense, it should probably not be }{\b\lang1033 lall\'eb}{\lang1033 , but rather }{\b\lang1033 land\'eb}{\lang1033  \endash  derived from a nasal-infixed form of the original word }{\i\lang1033 g-lada-}{
\lang1033 . On the other hand, the similar but distinct verb }{\b\lang1033 lala}{\lang1033 - "deny" found in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033  (LR:367) never contained a }{\b\lang1033 d}{\lang1033 , so its past tense may well be }{\b\lang1033 lall
\'eb}{\lang1033  (unless it is }{\b\lang1033 lalan\'eb}{\lang1033 , and I think I lean toward that form).
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 The }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 
 actually provides a few examples of even more complex A-stems that also drop their ending and in effect transform themselves into primary verbs in the past tense. The verb }{\b\lang1033 farya}{\lang1033 - "to suffice" is said to have the past tense }{
\b\lang1033 farn\'eb}{\lang1033  (Etym, entry }{\i\lang1033 PHAR}{\lang1033 ); here the whole ending -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033  drops out in the past tense, which is formed as if this were a primary verb **}{\b\lang1033 fer}{\lang1033 
-. Based on such a regular example as the one we quoted above \endash  namely }{\b\lang1033 ulya}{\lang1033 - "pour", past tense }{\b\lang1033 ulyan\'eb}{\lang1033  \endash   we would of course expect the past tense of }{\b\lang1033 ferya}{\lang1033 
- to be **}{\b\lang1033 feryan\'eb}{\lang1033 . But actually even our "regular" example }{\b\lang1033 ulya}{\lang1033 - also has an alternative past tense form }{\b\lang1033 ull\'eb}{\lang1033  (Etym, entry }{\i\lang1033 ULU}{\lang1033 
), and this is a particularly interesting example, for Tolkien indicated that the two past tenses }{\b\lang1033 ulyan\'eb}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 ull\'eb}{\lang1033 
 were not interchangeable. They had somewhat different meanings. There will be a fuller discussion of this in Lesson Ten; for now it suffices to say that I think most verbs in -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033 
 would retain this ending when the past tense suffix -}{\b\lang1033 n\'eb}{\lang1033  is added. (But }{\b\lang1033 ull\'eb}{\lang1033  as one past tense of }{\b\lang1033 ulya}{\lang1033 -, formed directly from }{\b\lang1033 ul}{\lang1033 
- rather than the full form of the verb, would seem to confirm that primary verbs in -}{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033  normally have past tenses in -}{\b\lang1033 l\'eb}{\lang1033 . Except for }{\b\lang1033 ull\'eb}{\lang1033 , we only have the example }{
\b\lang1033 vil}{\lang1033 - "fly", pa.t. }{\b\lang1033 vill\'eb}{\lang1033  to go on \endash  so an extra, if indirect, confirmation of this pattern is very welcome!)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab Finally we will discuss a strange past tense formation that may occur in the case of verbs in -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033 
. Perhaps it should not be seen as irregular, for Tolkien actually described one such past tense as "regular...for a -}{\i\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033 
 verb of this class" (WJ:366). Nonetheless, its formation is less than straightforward. It is exemplified already in the earliest material: The 1915 Lexicon contains a verb }{\b\lang1033 lahta}{\lang1033 - (QL:50; the verb is not clearly gloss
ed), but its past tense is not **}{\b\lang1033 lahtan\'eb}{\lang1033  as we might expect: Instead we find }{\b\lang1033 lahant\'eb}{\lang1033 . In other words, the verb }{\b\lang1033 lahta}{\lang1033 - is reworked into }{\b\lang1033 lahat}{\lang1033 
- (the stem-vowel being repeated between the second and the third consonant, breaking up the consonant cluster, whereas the final -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  is dropped), and the past tense }{\b\lang1033 lahant\'eb}{\lang1033  is then formed from this }{
\b\lang1033 lahat}{\lang1033 - by means of nasal-infixion and an added -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033 , in itself a quite regular process familiar from primary verbs.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 A much later example can be found in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 , where the verb }{\b\lang1033 orta}{\lang1033 - "rise, raise" is assigned a past tense form }{\b\lang1033 oront\'eb}{
\lang1033  (Etym, entry }{\i\lang1033 ORO}{\lang1033 ), though }{\b\lang1033 oront\'eb}{\lang1033 
 is not there clearly presented as a Quenya form: In Etym, it is actually quite unclear what language it is meant to belong to. However, in some of Tolkien's earlier drafts for }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 , the past tense of }{\b\lang1033 orta}
{\lang1033 - did appear as }{\b\lang1033 oront\'eb}{\lang1033 , not "regular" }{\b\lang1033 ortan\'eb}{\lang1033  as it became in the final version. So what is going on here? 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab Our only real clue is what Tolkien wrote in WJ:366, where he somewhat surprisingly declared the form }{\b\lang1033 oant\'eb}{\lang1033  \endash  the past tense of }{\b\lang1033 auta}{\lang1033 
- "go away, leave" \endash  to be quite regular "for a -}{\i\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033  verb of this class". According to the "regular" system we have tried to make out, }{\b\lang1033 oant\'eb}{\lang1033  instead of **}{\b\lang1033 autan\'eb}{\lang1033 
 inevitably seems highly irregular. Tolkien derived the verb }{\b\lang1033 auta}{\lang1033 - from a root }{\i\lang1033 AWA}{\lang1033  (WJ:365), so its form in the primitive language is probably meant to be }{\i\lang1033 awat\'e2}{\lang1033 
 (my reconstruction). As primitive Elvish evolved towards Quenya as we know it, the second of two identical short vowels in concomitant syllables was often lost; hence }{\i\lang1033 awat\'e2}{\lang1033  would have been shortened to }{\i\lang1033 aw't\'e2}
{\lang1033  = }{\i\lang1033 aut\'e2}{\lang1033 , and this in turn is the direct ancestor of Quenya }{\b\lang1033 auta}{\lang1033 -. But it seems that the old past tense of such a verb as }{\i\lang1033 awat\'e2}{\lang1033 
, with a vowel immediately preceding the ending -}{\i\lang1033 t\'e2}{\lang1033 , was formed by nasal-infixion: Tolkien explicitly gave the past tense of the primitive verb as }{\i\lang1033 awant\'ea}{\lang1033 
 (WJ:366; the spelling there used is actually }{\i\lang1033 \'e1wa-n-t\'ea}{\lang1033 , the hyphens before and after the }{\i\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  apparently emphasizing that it is an infix \endash  whereas the accent on the initial }{\i\lang1033 \'e1}{
\lang1033  here only means that it is stressed, not that the vowel is long).
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 In the case of a word like }{\i\lang1033 awant\'ea}{\lang1033 , the rule that the second of two identical short vowels is lost could not apply (no **}{\i\lang1033 aw'nt\'ea}{\lang1033 
), for such loss does not occur immediately in front of a consonant cluster \endash  and the nasal-infixion has here produced a cluster }{\i\lang1033 nt}{\lang1033 . The "final" Quenya form of }{\i\lang1033 awant\'ea}{\lang1033 , namely }{\b\lang1033 oant
\'eb}{\lang1033 , is somewhat obscured because the group }{\i\lang1033 awa}{\lang1033  later became }{\b\lang1033 oa}{\lang1033  in Quenya \endash  but this change has nothing to do with the past tense formation. Now we can explain a form like }{
\b\lang1033 oront\'eb}{\lang1033  as the past tense of }{\b\lang1033 orta}{\lang1033 -: In the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 , the original root is given as }{\i\lang1033 ORO}{\lang1033  (LR:379), so Tolkien probably meant the verb }{\b\lang1033 
orta}{\lang1033 - to be descended from older }{\i\lang1033 orot\'e2}{\lang1033 - after the regular loss of the second vowel. But the past tense of this }{\i\lang1033 orot\'e2}{\lang1033 - was the nasal-infixed form }{\i\lang1033 oront\'ea}{\lang1033 
 (both are my reconstructions), and this produced Quenya }{\b\lang1033 oront\'eb}{\lang1033 , the second vowel here being preserved because of the following cluster }{\b\lang1033 nt}{\lang1033  (no one wants to say **}{\b\lang1033 ornt\'eb}{\lang1033 !)

\par When Tolkien apparently changed his mind and altered the past tense of }{\b\lang1033 orta}{\lang1033 - from }{\b\lang1033 oront\'eb}{\lang1033  to }{\b\lang1033 ortan\'eb}{\lang1033 
 (a "regular" form according to the system we have set out), this would seem to suggest that he had now decided that the primitive forms were instead }{\i\lang1033 ort\'e2}{\lang1033 - with past tense }{\i\lang1033 orta-n\'ea}{\lang1033 
: There was never any vowel immediately in front of the ending -}{\i\lang1033 t\'e2}{\lang1033  after all, and therefore the past tense was not formed by nasal-infixion, but by the independent ending -}{\i\lang1033 n\'ea}{\lang1033  (> Quenya -}{
\b\lang1033 n\'eb}{\lang1033 ). This is not the only example of Tolkien apparently changing his mind about which verbs actually belong to this exclusive "class". The }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033  lists a verb }{\b\lang1033 atalta}{\lang1033 
- "collapse, fall in" (entry }{\i\lang1033 TAL\'c1T}{\lang1033 ); no past tense is there mentioned, but in one text we have }{\b\lang1033 atalant\'eb}{\lang1033  (LR:56, translated "down-fell"). This would seem to presuppose that the primitive forms were 
}{\i\lang1033 atalat\'e2}{\lang1033 - with past tense }{\i\lang1033 atalant\'ea}{\lang1033  (my reconstructions, but cf. WJ:319 regarding }{\i\lang1033 ATALAT}{\lang1033  as a derivative form of the root }{\i\lang1033 TALAT}{\lang1033 
). Yet in Tolkien's later texts the past tense of }{\b\lang1033 atalta}{\lang1033 - becomes }{\b\lang1033 ataltan\'eb}{\lang1033  (LR:47 and SD:247), simply formed by adding the normal ending -}{\b\lang1033 n\'eb}{\lang1033 
. So now Tolkien had presumably come to envision the primitive forms as }{\i\lang1033 atalt\'e2}{\lang1033 -, past tense }{\i\lang1033 atalta-n\'ea}{\lang1033  (my reconstructions).
\par If the apparent revisions }{\b\lang1033 oront\'eb}{\lang1033  > }{\b\lang1033 ortan\'eb}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 atalant\'eb}{\lang1033  > }{\b\lang1033 ataltan\'eb}{\lang1033  do not reflect changes in his ideas 
about the primitive Elvish forms, it may be that he imagined a development whereby the Eldar replaced the more complex past tense formations with simpler, analogical forms. For instance, }{\b\lang1033 oront\'eb}{\lang1033  as past tense of }{\b\lang1033 
orta}{\lang1033 - could have been replaced by }{\b\lang1033 ortan\'eb}{\lang1033  because of analogy with such straightforward past tense formations as }{\b\lang1033 hehta}{\lang1033 -, pa.t. }{\b\lang1033 hehtan\'eb}{\lang1033  (WJ:365). In the }{
\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 , the form }{\b\lang1033 oront\'eb}{\lang1033  is indeed marked with a symbol that indicates that it is "poetic or archaic" (cf. LR:347); is this to suggest that it was ordinarily replaced by the "non-archaic" form }{
\b\lang1033 ortan\'eb}{\lang1033 ? Especially considering how Tolkien later came to envision the history of the Quenya tongue \endash  that it was used as a ceremonial language in Middle-earth, but was no longer anyone's mother-tongue \endash  we coul
d very plausibly assume that its grammar was somewhat simplified, more complex formations being suppressed and replaced by simpler analogical ones. Indeed }{\b\lang1033 oant\'eb}{\lang1033  rather than **}{\b\lang1033 autan\'eb}{\lang1033 
 as the past tense of }{\b\lang1033 auta}{\lang1033 - "to leave" is the only verb I can think of where we "must" use this special past tense formation, unless we are to accept some of the earliest "Qenya" material with no reservations (and I have plenty).

\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par With this we conclude our survey of various strange or irregular ways of forming the past tense; as I said above, the exercises below are meant to reflect the }{\i\lang1033 regular}{\lang1033  system instead.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Remember that just like present-tense verbs, a past tense form receives the ending -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 
 if it has a plural subject (or multiple subjects). For instance, the simplest past tense of the verb }{\b\lang1033 lanta}{\lang1033 - "fall" is }{\b\lang1033 lantan\'eb}{\lang1033 , but with a plural subject it becomes }{\b\lang1033 lantaner}{\lang1033 
 (SD:246). Naturally, he diaeresis over the final -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  disappears, since the vowel is no longer final when the plural ending -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  is added after it.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\i\cf2\lang1033 Summary of Lesson Six:}{\lang1033  While various irregular formations occur, it would seem that the past tense of Quenya verbs is typically formed according to these rules: A-stem verbs simply receive the ending -}{\b\lang1033 n\'eb}{
\lang1033 . The "primary" or ending-less verbs can also receive this ending if their last consonant is -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 m}{\lang1033 , probably also -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  (no examples). If added to a primary verb in -}
{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 , the ending -}{\b\lang1033 n\'eb}{\lang1033  turns into -}{\b\lang1033 l\'eb}{\lang1033  (resulting in a double }{\b\lang1033 ll}{\lang1033 , e.g. }{\b\lang1033 vill\'eb}{\lang1033  as the past tense of }{\b\lang1033 vil}{
\lang1033 - "fly"). Primary verbs ending in one of the consonants }{\b\lang1033 p}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033  have past tenses constructed by adding the ending -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  combined with }{
\i\lang1033 nasal-infixion}{\lang1033  intruding before the last consonant of the verbal stem; the infix manifests as }{\b\lang1033 m}{\lang1033  before }{\b\lang1033 p}{\lang1033  (hence }{\b\lang1033 tomp\'eb}{\lang1033  as the past tense of }{
\b\lang1033 top}{\lang1033 - "cover"), otherwise as }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  (hence }{\b\lang1033 mant\'eb}{\lang1033  as the past tense of }{\b\lang1033 mat}{\lang1033 - "eat").
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\cf2\lang1033 VOCABULARY
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\lang1033 lemp\'eb}{\lang1033  "five"
\par }{\b\lang1033 elen}{\lang1033  "star" 
\par }{\b\lang1033 harma}{\lang1033  "treasure" }{\fs20\lang1033 (noun)
\par }{\b\lang1033 sil}{\lang1033 - verb "shine" }{\fs20\lang1033 (with white or silver light, like star-shine or moon-shine)}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 hir}{\lang1033 - verb "find"
\par }{\b\lang1033 cap}{\lang1033 - verb "jump"
\par }{\b\lang1033 tec}{\lang1033 - verb "write"
\par }{\b\lang1033 quet}{\lang1033 - verb "speak, say"
\par }{\b\lang1033 mel}{\lang1033 - verb "love" }{\fs20\lang1033 (as friend; no Quenya word referring to erotic love between the sexes has been published)
\par }{\b\lang1033 cen}{\lang1033 - verb "see" }{\fs20\lang1033 (related to }{\b\fs20\lang1033 cenda}{\fs20\lang1033 - "read", which word is derived from a strengthened form of the same stem and meaning, basically, to watch closely). }{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 orta}{\lang1033 - verb "rise", }{\fs20\lang1033 also used = }{\lang1033 "raise, lift up".
\par }{\b\lang1033 harya}{\lang1033 - verb "possess; have" }{\fs20\lang1033 (related to the noun }{\b\fs20\lang1033 harma}{\fs20\lang1033  "treasure", basically referring to a "possession")}{\lang1033 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\cf2\lang1033 EXERCISES
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\lang1033 1. Translate into English (and practice your vocabulary at the same time; most of the words employed in exercises }{\i\lang1033 A-H}{\lang1033  were introduced in earlier lessons):
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\i\lang1033 A.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 I n\'e9r cendan\'eb i parma.}{\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\lang1033 B.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 I Naucor manter.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 C.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 I aran tultan\'eb i t\'e1ri.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 D.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 N\'eds lindan\'eb.
\par }{\i\lang1033 E.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 I vendi tirner i Elda.
\par }{\i\lang1033 F.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 I lemp\'eb roccor caitaner nu i alta tasar.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 G.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 I eleni siller.
\par }{\i\lang1033 H}{\lang1033 . }{\b\lang1033 I Nauco cenn\'eb rocco.}{\lang1033 
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\lang1033 2. Translate into Quenya:
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 I.}{\lang1033  A Dwarf found the treasure.
\par }{\i\lang1033 J.}{\lang1033  The Elf spoke.
\par }{\i\lang1033 K.}{\lang1033  The horse jumped.}{\b\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 L.}{\lang1033  The king loved the Elves.
\par }{\i\lang1033 M.}{\lang1033  A man wrote five books.
\par }{\i\lang1033 N}{\lang1033 . The queen rose.
\par }{\i\lang1033 O}{\lang1033 . The kings possessed great treasures.
\par }{\i\lang1033 P. }{\lang1033 The king and the queen summoned four Elves and five Dwarves.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\fs36\cf6\lang1033 LESSON SEVEN}{\cf6\lang1033 
\par }{\b\fs32\lang1033 Future tense and Aorist
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\cf2\lang1033 THE FUTURE TENSE
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 In this lesson we will introduce two new tenses of the verb, the }{\i\lang1033 future}{\lang1033  and the }{\i\lang1033 aorist}{\lang1033 
. We shall have to spend quite a few paragraphs trying to define the function of the latter, but the function of the future tense is easy enough to grasp: This tense is used with reference to }{\i\lang1033 future}{\lang1033  actions.
\par \tab English (unlike, say, French) has no distinct future tense. Instead of a unitary, inflectional form of the verb that only refers to future actions
, English may fall back on longer phrases involving extra verbs like "shall" or "will": A past tense form like "came" has no one-word counterpart with future reference that would exemplify a true future tense \endash 
 we only find circumlocutions like "shall come" or "will come" (or even "is going to come"). It is even possible to use the }{\i\lang1033 present}{\lang1033  tense with future reference: "He }{\i\lang1033 comes}{\lang1033 
 tomorrow." For this reason, linguists may refer to the English "present" tense as a }{\i\lang1033 non-past}{\lang1033  tense instead: It actually covers both present and future.
\par \tab These somewhat asymmetric features of English are avoided in Tolkien's Elvish. Languages like Quenya and Sindarin do possess true future tense forms of the verb. For instance, the future tense of the verb }{\b\lang1033 hir}{\lang1033 
- "find" appears near the end of }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 , in the sentence }{\b\lang1033 nai ely\'eb }{\b\i\lang1033 hiruva}{\lang1033 , "maybe thou }{\i\lang1033 shalt}{\lang1033  }{\i\lang1033 find}{\lang1033  [it]". The example }{
\b\lang1033 hiruva}{\lang1033  "shall (shalt) find" includes what seems to be the normal \endash  possibly universal \endash  Quenya future tense marker: the ending -}{\b\lang1033 uva}{\lang1033 . This pattern is confirmed by the }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{
\lang1033  poem, that includes the examples }{\b\lang1033 cenuva}{\lang1033  "shall heed", }{\b\lang1033 tiruva}{\lang1033  "shall watch" and }{\b\lang1033 hlaruva}{\lang1033  "shall hear" (verbs }{\b\lang1033 cen}{\lang1033 - "see, behold, heed", }{
\b\lang1033 tir}{\lang1033 - "watch", }{\b\lang1033 hlar}{\lang1033 - "hear"). In LR:63, Tolkien translates the verb }{\b\lang1033 queluva}{\lang1033  as "faileth", but this is only an exam
ple of the English "present" or non-past tense embracing the future as well. The context clearly indicates that the verbal action in question belongs to the future: }{\b\lang1033 Man t\'e1r\'eb ant\'e1va nin Il\'favatar, Il\'favatar, eny\'e1r\'eb
 tar i tyel \'edr\'eb Anarinya }{\b\i\lang1033 queluva}{\b\lang1033 ?}{\lang1033  "What will Il\'favatar, O Il\'favatar, give me in that day beyond the end, when my Sun }{\i\lang1033 faileth}{\lang1033  [literally: shall fail]?"
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 The examples listed so far exemplify the future tense of "primary" or ending-less verbs only. It seems that the ending -}{\b\lang1033 uva}{\lang1033  is also used in the case of 
the more numerous A-stem verbs, which however }{\i\lang1033 lose their final -}{\b\i\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  before the future tense ending is added (one exception, see note below). In a post-LotR source, the future tense of the verb }{\b\lang1033 linda}{
\lang1033 - "sing" appears as }{\b\lang1033 linduva}{\lang1033  (attested with a secondary ending here removed; see Taum Santoski's article in the October 1985 issue of the newsletter Beyond Bree). Also, what must be the future tense of the A-stem verb }{
\b\lang1033 ora}{\lang1033 - "to urge, impel" is apparently given as }{\b\lang1033 oruva}{\lang1033  in another post-LotR source (VT41:13, 18; Tolkien actually wrote }{\b\lang1033 oruv\'b7}{\lang1033 
, but the editor points out that "the dot may be an inadvertently incomplete }{\i\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 ": No Quenya word can end in -}{\b\lang1033 v}{\lang1033 .) 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs20\lang1033 NOTE: Notice, however, that a final -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 a}{\fs20\lang1033  does not drop out before the ending -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 uva}{\fs20\lang1033  when this -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 a}{
\fs20\lang1033  is also the }{\i\fs20\lang1033 only}{\fs20\lang1033  vowel of the verbal stem. Thus, the future tense form of the copulas derived from the stem }{\i\fs20\lang1033 N\'c2}{\fs20\lang1033  "to be" (cf. }{\b\fs20\lang1033 n\'e1}{
\fs20\lang1033  "is") is not **}{\b\fs20\lang1033 nuva}{\fs20\lang1033 , but }{\b\fs20\lang1033 nauva}{\fs20\lang1033 : This word for "will be" is attested in VT42:34.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 It may be that Tolkien at one point imagined a somewhat more complicated system regarding the A-stems. Above we quoted a line from the pre-LotR Quenya text usually called }{\i\lang1033 F\'ed
riel's Song}{\lang1033 , including }{\b\lang1033 ant\'e1va}{\lang1033  as the future tense of }{\b\lang1033 anta}{\lang1033 - "give" (LR:63, 72). Here Tolkien seems to be using a system whereby A-stem verbs form their future tense by }{\i\lang1033 
lengthening}{\lang1033  the final -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  to -}{\b\lang1033 \'e1}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 adding}{\lang1033  the ending -}{\b\lang1033 va}{\lang1033  (shorter variant of -}{\b\lang1033 uva}{\lang1033 
?) However, in light of the later examples }{\b\lang1033 linduva}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 oruva}{\lang1033  (instead of **}{\b\lang1033 lind\'e1va}{\lang1033 , **}{\b\lang1033 or\'e1va}{\lang1033 
), we may conclude that Tolkien eventually decided to make -}{\b\lang1033 uva}{\lang1033  the more or less universal future tense marker: This ending simply causes the final -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 
 of A-stems to drop out. My best guess is that in LotR-style Quenya, the future tense of }{\b\lang1033 anta}{\lang1033 - should be }{\b\lang1033 antuva}{\lang1033  rather than }{\b\lang1033 ant\'e1va}{\lang1033 
, since Tolkien may seem to have simplified the system.
\par However, there is one }{\i\lang1033 possible}{\lang1033  complication in LotR-style Quenya as well, regarding the primary verbs. In }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  in LotR occurs the future tense form }{\b\lang1033 enquantuva}{\lang1033 
, "shall refill". Removing the prefix }{\b\lang1033 en}{\lang1033 - "re-", we have }{\b\lang1033 quantuva}{\lang1033  for "shall fill". This used to be taken as the future tense of a verb }{\b\lang1033 quanta}{\lang1033 
- "to fill", related to the adjective }{\b\lang1033 quanta}{\lang1033  "full". Tolkien's earliest "Qenya" wordlist indeed lists such a verb (QL:78, there spelt }{\b\lang1033 qanta}{\lang1033 
-). However, about half a decade after publishing LotR, Tolkien in the essay }{\i\lang1033 Quendi and Eldar}{\lang1033  seemingly cited the Quenya verb "to fill" as }{\b\lang1033 quat}{\lang1033 
- (WJ:392). This would seem to be a primary verb, past tense presumably }{\b\lang1033 quant\'eb}{\lang1033  (the pa.t. "qante" is actually given in QL:78, but there it is evidently only meant as a permissible 
shortening of the full form "qantane"; the regular past tense of a verb }{\b\lang1033 quanta}{\lang1033 - would be }{\b\lang1033 quantan\'eb}{\lang1033  in later Quenya as well). If Tolkien had decided that the Quenya verb "to fill" is actually }{
\b\lang1033 quat}{\lang1033 -, and its future tense is }{\b\lang1033 quantuva}{\lang1033  as }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  would seem to i
ndicate, should we conclude that the same verbs that form their past tense with nasal-infixion + the ending -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  similarly form their }{\i\lang1033 future}{\lang1033  tense with nasal-infixion + the ending -}{\b\lang1033 uva}{
\lang1033 ? For instance, should the future tense of verbs like }{\b\lang1033 mat}{\lang1033 - "eat", }{\b\lang1033 top}{\lang1033 - "cover" and }{\b\lang1033 tac}{\lang1033 - "fasten" be }{\b\lang1033 mantuva}{\lang1033  "shall eat", }{\b\lang1033 
tompuva}{\lang1033  "shall cover", }{\b\lang1033 tancuva}{\lang1033  "shall fasten"? (Compare the nasal-infixion in the past tense forms: }{\b\lang1033 mant\'eb}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 tomp\'eb}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 tanc\'eb}{\lang1033 
.) Or should we just add the ending -}{\b\lang1033 uva}{\lang1033  to the verbal stem without any further manipulations, hence }{\b\lang1033 matuva}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 topuva}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 tacuva}{\lang1033 
 instead? General principles would perhaps suggest the latter, but there remains the curious example of }{\b\lang1033 quantuva}{\lang1033  next to }{\b\lang1033 quat}{\lang1033 
-. If there is to be no nasal-infixion in the future tense forms, we would have to accept that the verb "fill" can be both }{\b\lang1033 quanta}{\lang1033 - and }{\b\lang1033 quat}{\lang1033 -, with separate future tenses }{\b\lang1033 quantuva}{
\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 quatuva}{\lang1033 .
\par I have used future tense forms with nasal-infixion in certain compositions of my own (and so have some people who put greater trust in my so-called "expert opinion" than they possibly should). But it may well be that Tolkien, mentioning the form }{
\b\lang1033 quat}{\lang1033 - in WJ:392, actually intended this to be simply the way the underlying root }{\i\lang1033 KWATA}{\lang1033  manifests in Quenya. The exact wording in the source involves a reference to "the verb stem *}{\i\lang1033 KWATA}{
\lang1033 , Q }{\i\lang1033 quat}{\lang1033 - 'fill'." If }{\b\lang1033 quat}{\lang1033 - is merely the way the ancient stem }{\i\lang1033 KWATA}{\lang1033  appears in Quenya, the actual verb "fill" could still be }{\b\lang1033 quanta}{\lang1033 
- with future tense }{\b\lang1033 quantuva}{\lang1033 . (Compare for instance the entry }{\i\lang1033 PAT}{\lang1033  in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 , this root }{\i\lang1033 PAT}{\lang1033  producing the Quenya verb }{\b\lang1033 panta}{
\lang1033 - "open". There is also an }{\i\lang1033 adjective}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 panta}{\lang1033  "open", exactly parallelling }{\b\lang1033 quanta}{\lang1033  "full" next to the verb }{\b\lang1033 quanta}{\lang1033 
- "fill"; perhaps the verb is derived from the adjective in both cases.)
\par }{\lang1033\cgrid0 Alternatively, }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 quat}{\lang1033\cgrid0 - really is the verb "to fill" and not just an underlying root-form, but the future tense }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 quantuva}{\lang1033\cgrid0  }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 still}{
\lang1033\cgrid0  presupposes a longer A-stem }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 quanta}{\lang1033\cgrid0 -. Perhaps Tolkien had just plain }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 forgotten}{\lang1033\cgrid0  that he had already published a form of the A-stem verb }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 
quanta}{\lang1033\cgrid0 - "fill", so that he was no longer free to change it to a primary verb }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 quat}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
-. (See PM:367-371 for an example of Tolkien working out some elaborate linguistic explanations that he had to scrap because he discovered that they conflicted with something he had already published in LotR \endash  a fatal footnote 
in an Appendix forcing him to reject his nice new ideas!)  
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033\cgrid0 \tab 
Thus, material presently available does not allow any certain conclusion in this matter. Writers can equally plausibly let verbs that show nasal infixion in the past tense do so also in the future tense (arguing from the }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 quat}{
\lang1033\cgrid0 -/}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 quantuva}{\lang1033\cgrid0  pair that this is how the language works) or choose to explain }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 quat}{\lang1033\cgrid0 - differently and form the future tense of }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 any}{
\lang1033\cgrid0  primary verb simply by adding the ending -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 uva}{\lang1033\cgrid0  (as in }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 hir}{\lang1033\cgrid0 -/}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 hiruva}{\lang1033\cgrid0 ). As users of Quenya we can probably
 well afford to live with slightly different dialects regarding this detail, until future publications hopefully allow us to pick the right explanation.
\par 
\par It must be assumed that the future tense, like all other tenses, receives the ending -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 r}{\lang1033\cgrid0  where it occurs with a plural subject (e.g. }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 elen siluva}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 "a star will shine", but plural }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 eleni siluva}{\b\ul\lang1033\cgrid0 r}{\lang1033\cgrid0  "stars will shine").
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\cf2\lang1033\cgrid0 THE AORIST
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033\cgrid0 We have now discussed all the three tenses corresponding to the basic trinity of past, present, and future. Yet the Quenya verb has other tenses as well. One is called the }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 
aorist}{\lang1033\cgrid0 . The use of this term with reference to Quenya grammar was long disputed by some, but a Tolkien text that finally became available in July 2000 demonstrates that he had indeed invented a Quenya tense he called aorist (VT41:17).

\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033\cgrid0 
While even people with no linguistic training readily understand what the past, present and future tenses are "for", it is hardly equally obvious what function the aorist tense has. (Some linguists would say that the aorist is strictly not 
a "tense" at all, according to certain definitions of that term; however, Tolkien did use the phrase "aorist tense" in VT41:17. We will not discuss this question here, wholly academic as it is.) So what, really, is an aorist?
\par To start with the word itself,
 it comes from Greek and literally means something like "unlimited" or "undetermined". The word was originally coined to describe a certain Greek form of the verb. In Greek this form contrasts with the past tense or "imperfect", the latter being used of a
 past action that }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 was being done}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 over a period of time (not just a momentary action). The aorist, on the other hand, has no such implications regarding the "duration" of the action. It just denotes a past action, period, with no further distinctions. When c
ontrasted with the imperfect, the Greek aorist can be used for a momentary or clearly finished (not on-going) action. Another use of the Greek aorist is not especially associated with the past: the aorist could be used to express }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 
general truths}{\lang1033\cgrid0  that are not limited to any specific time, like "sheep }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 eat}{\lang1033\cgrid0  grass".
\par But this was the Greek aorist; the Quenya aorist is not used in quite the same way. Yet their functions do overlap in some respects, which must be the reason why Tolkien decided to employ this term fr
om Greek grammar in the first place. We will try to determine the }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 function}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 of the Quenya aorist before we discuss how it is actually formed. For now, just take my word that the verbs in the examples I cite are aorists.
\par The Quenya aorist, like the Greek one, can be used to express "general truths". Our best example is a sentence occurring in WJ:391, where Elves are described as }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 i }{\b\i\lang1033\cgrid0 carir}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0  quettar \'f3mainen}{
\lang1033\cgrid0 , "those who }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 make}{\lang1033\cgrid0  words with voices". The aorist verb }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 carir}{\lang1033\cgrid0  "make" here denotes a general habit of the Elves,
 covering past, present and future, for the Elves were making words throughout their history. The sentence }{\b\i\lang1033\cgrid0 polin}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0  quet\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0  "}{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 I can}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 speak" (VT41:6) includes another aorist verb, and again a "general truth" is presented, though in this case it relates only to the speaker: The meaning is of course "I can (always) speak", presenting a }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 general}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 ability, not just something that applies only to the present time (as if the speaker was dumb yesterday and may go dumb again tomorrow). So one important function of the Quenya aorist is that it is used, or rather }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 can}{
\lang1033\cgrid0  be used, with reference to verbal actions that transcend the here and now \endash  rather describing some "timeless" truth or "general" situation. In }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 in LotR, Galadriel describes the gloomy state of Middle-earth using an aorist verb: }{\b\lang1033 sindan\'f3riello }{\b\i\lang1033 caita}{\b\lang1033  morni\'eb}{\lang1033  "out of a grey country darkness }{\i\lang1033 lies}{\lang1033 
" (not present tense }{\b\lang1033 cait\'eba}{\lang1033  = "is lying", as if this were merely a strictly present phenomenon, soon to pass). The first words of }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  also include an aorist: }{\b\lang1033 lauri\'eb }{
\b\i\lang1033 lantar}{\b\lang1033  lassi}{\lang1033 , "like gold }{\i\lang1033 fall}{\lang1033  the leaves" \endash  but this is not just a here-and-now description of leaves that }{\i\lang1033 are falling}{\lang1033  (which would presumably be }{
\b\lang1033 lant\'ebar}{\lang1033 , present tense): The following lines indicate that Galadriel describes the general situation in Middle-earth, the ever-recurring autumnal decay as she has been observing it throughout }{\b\lang1033 y\'e9ni \'fan\'f3tim
\'eb}{\lang1033 , "long years uncountable". So our example "sheep }{\i\lang1033 eat}{\lang1033  grass" is probably best rendered into Quenya using an aorist verb: }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1mar }{\b\i\lang1033 matir}{\b\lang1033  salqu\'eb}{\lang1033 
 (singular "sheep" = }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1ma}{\lang1033 , "grass" = }{\b\lang1033 salqu\'eb}{\lang1033 ). As the example }{\b\lang1033 polin quet\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "I can speak" demonstrates, the aorist can also be used to describe the abilities or habits of a single individual (}{\b\lang1033 i m\'e1ma }{\b\i\lang1033 mat\'eb}{\b\lang1033  salqu\'eb}{\lang1033  = "the sheep }{\i\lang1033 eats}{\lang1033  grass").

\par It seems, however, that the Quenya aorist is no
t only used to describe "timeless truths". In some cases Tolkien himself seems to waver in the choice between the aorist and the present tense, the latter more typically describing an ongoing here-and-now situation. This hesitation on Tolkien's part sugge
st that these tenses are to some extent interchangeable. We have an aorist in the sentence }{\b\lang1033 \'f3renya }{\b\i\lang1033 quet\'eb}{\b\lang1033  nin}{\lang1033  "my heart }{\i\lang1033 tells}{\lang1033 
 me" (VT41:11), which is apparently quite synonymous with the alternative wording }{\b\lang1033 \'f3renya }{\b\i\lang1033 qu\'e9ta}{\b\lang1033  nin}{\lang1033  (VT41:13) employing a present tense form instead of an aorist. In the famous greeting }{
\b\lang1033 elen }{\b\i\lang1033 s\'edla}{\b\lang1033  l\'famenn' omentielvo}{\lang1033 , "a star }{\i\lang1033 shines}{\lang1033  [or rather }{\i\lang1033 is shining}{\lang1033 
] on the hour of our meeting", Tolkien finally decided to use a present tense form \endash  but in earlier drafts, he used an aorist }{\b\lang1033 sil\'eb}{\lang1033  instead 
(RS:324). This greeting, having relevance for "our meeting" only, obviously cannot describe any "general truth" transcending time. Yet it is apparently permissible to use an aorist form even in such a context (though Tolkien decided that it was }{
\i\lang1033 better}{\lang1033  to use the present tense).
\par It should be noted that the Quenya aorist is generally associated with the present, not with the past as in Greek. As }{\lang1033\cgrid0 Jerry Caveney wrote about Tolkien on the Elfling list (August 3, 2000):}{\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }\pard \li708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033\cgrid0 In what seems to me typical of his creativeness and 'fun' in creating languages, he took the idea of the aorist aspect, and said, in effect, 'What if a language used the aorist to contrast 
}{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 present}{\lang1033\cgrid0  general (unlimited) actions to present continuative actions instead of using it to contrast past gene
ral actions to present continuative [as in classical Greek]?' The result is Tolkien's 'present aorist'. :)  He thus created a language that could distinguish continuative from general present actions simply, something classical Greek could not readily do,
 and which modern English and French, for example, can only do with extra words (}{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 I walk}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 I am walking}{\lang1033\cgrid0 ; }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 je marche}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 
je suis en train de marcher}{\lang1033\cgrid0 ). I suspect Tolkien enjoyed the elegance of this basic grammatical distinction, which I am not aware that any 'living' language has.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033\cgrid0 
\par On the other hand, Carl F. Hostetter thinks the Quenya aorist is used to describe an action that is "punctual, habitual, or otherwise durationless" (VT41:15). This is probably correct in most cases, describing the }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 typical}{
\lang1033\cgrid0  function of the aorist. Yet some examples suggest that it may be better to say that }{\lang1033 whereas the present tense explicitly identifies an }{\i\lang1033 ongoing}{\lang1033  action}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , the Quenya aorist is }{
\lang1033 simply }{\i\lang1033 unmarked}{\lang1033  as far as duration is concerned. It does not necessarily contrast with the continuative present tense; an aorist }{\i\lang1033 as such}{\lang1033 
 does not signal that a verbal action must be non-continuative or "durationless". Rather, as Caveney says, it is a "general" form, an all-purpose "present tense" that simply doesn't address the question of whether the a
ction denoted is continuative, habitual or momentary. As Luk\'e1}{\lang1033\cgrid0 {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 235 \\f "Times New Roman Special G1" \\s 14}{\fldrslt\f17\fs28}}}{\lang1033  Nov\'e1k observed on the Elfling list (August 1, 2000): "}{
\lang1033\cgrid0 It seems that the aorist is so 'aoristos' [Greek: unlimited] that it can express almost everything."}{\lang1033  
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 In the exclamation}{\lang1033\cgrid0  }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 auta i l\'f3m\'eb!}{\lang1033\cgrid0  "the night is passing" (}{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 Silmarillion}{\lang1033\cgrid0  ch. 20), the form }{
\b\lang1033\cgrid0 auta}{\lang1033\cgrid0  would seem to be an aorist (contrasting with the present tense, which is probably }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 aut\'eba}{\lang1033\cgrid0 ) \endash 
 yet Tolkien employs the translation "is passing" rather than "passes". So it would seem that the aorist can also be used for an }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 ongoing}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 action; it just isn't explicitly marked as such, grammatically speaking. If this is correct, it would be difficult to pin down any case where it is palpably }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 wrong}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 to replace the present tense with an aorist. Using the aorist would be simply a rather neutral way of talking about "present" actions \endash  whether such action is actually ongoing, habitual, or merely an expression of "general truths". (Hence }{
\b\lang1033\cgrid0 m\'e1mar }{\b\i\lang1033\cgrid0 matir}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0  salqu\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0  = "sheep }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 eat}{\lang1033\cgrid0  grass" could also be understood as "sheep }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 are eating}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 grass", though for this meaning it is probably better \endash  but hardly mandatory \endash  to use the present tense: }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 m\'e1tar}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
.) In choosing between the aorist and the present tense, the only hard-and-fast rule one has to go on seems to be that the present tense should }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 not}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 be used with reference to entirely duration-less actions: The Quenya present tense is always used about some kind of }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 continuous}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 action. (Indeed some students would dispense with the term "present tense" and rather speak of the "continuative" form.) Beyond this one restriction, it seems that writers can choose quite freely between the aorist and the present tense.
\par }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 Generally}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , however, it seems that the Quenya aorist corresponds to the English simple present (that shows either the ending -}{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 s}{\lang1033\cgrid0  or no ending at 
all, depending on the grammatical context). So Tolkien often translated Quenya aorists: e.g. }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 top\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0  "covers" (LR:394), }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 mac\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0  "hews" (VT39:11), }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 tirin}{
\lang1033\cgrid0  "I watch" (LR:394). The Quenya }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 present}{\lang1033\cgrid0  tense, on the other hand, is often best translated using the English "is... -ing" construction: }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 t\'f3pa}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 "is covering", }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 m\'e1ca}{\lang1033\cgrid0  "is hewing", }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 t\'edran}{\lang1033\cgrid0  "I am watching". (The ending -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 n}{\lang1033\cgrid0  in the examples }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 tirin}{
\lang1033\cgrid0 /}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 t\'edran}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , as well as in the form }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 polin}{\lang1033\cgrid0  "I can" cited above, signifies "I": This suffix will be discussed in the next lesson.) In Lesson 
Five we pointed out that the present tense form}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 qu\'e9ta}{\lang1033  denotes "is saying" rather than just "says"; conversely, the aorist }{\b\lang1033 quet\'eb}{\lang1033  is usually "says" rather than "is saying".}{
\lang1033\cgrid0  If the Quenya aorist is used somewhat like the English simple present tense, the aorist can be used to describe actions that are perceived as duration-less or habitual. For instance, an aorist like }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 cap\'eb}{
\lang1033\cgrid0  "jumps" may describe an action that is momentary ("he jumps") or habitual/characteristic ("any frog jumps"). 
\par Yet we also seem to have exa
mples of Tolkien using the Quenya present/"continuous" tense instead of the aorist where English would still translate the verb in question as a simple present tense form, not as an "is ...-ing" construction. Consider this line from }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 
Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0 : }{\b\lang1033 h\'edsi\'eb }{\b\i\lang1033 unt\'fapa}{\b\lang1033  Calaciryo m\'edri}{\lang1033  "mist }{\i\lang1033 covers}{\lang1033  the jewels of Calacirya". The present tense form }{\b\lang1033 unt\'fapa}{\lang1033 
 describes a continuous action, more literally "is covering", but here Tolkien wrote "covers" instead. Presumably it would in no way have been wrong to use an aorist instead.
 After all, the mist covering the jewels of Calacirya is evidently perceived as a rather general state of things, not merely as an ongoing meteorological phenomenon that will soon pass! (The aorist would presumably be }{\b\lang1033 untup\'eb}{\lang1033  
\endash  perhaps this form, stressed on the first rather than the penultimate syllable, just didn't fit the meter of Tolkien's poem? Anyhow, the latter element of this verb }{\b\lang1033 untup}{\lang1033 - seems to be a variant of }{\b\lang1033 top}{
\lang1033 - in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 , both verbs meaning "cover".)
\par Another example of a present tense where we might expect to see an aorist can be found in Cirion's Oath (UT:305, 317), in the sentence }{\b\lang1033 i }{\b\i\lang1033 h\'e1rar}{\b\lang1033  mahalmassen mi N\'famen}{\lang1033  = "those who }{\i\lang1033 
sit}{\lang1033  on thrones in the West". This refers to the Valar, and their being enthroned in the West must be considered a "general truth", just like it is a general truth that Elves }{\i\lang1033 make}{\lang1033  (aorist }{\b\lang1033 carir}{
\lang1033 ) words with voices. Yet Tolkien used what seems to be a present tense instead of an aorist: }{\b\lang1033 h\'e1ra}{\lang1033 , here plural }{\b\lang1033 h\'e1rar}{\lang1033 , apparently suggesting a primary verb }{\b\lang1033 har}{\lang1033 
- "to sit". The plural aorist would probably be }{\b\lang1033 harir}{\lang1033  instead. It may be noted that while Tolkien translated }{\b\lang1033 h\'e1rar}{\lang1033 
 as "sit" in the running English translation in UT:305, he employed the more literal translation "are sitting" in his linguistic discussion in UT:317. Yet this se
ems to demonstrate that in Quenya, one can use the present tense as well as the aorist to describe also a general state of things. After all, the Valar's agelong state of being enthroned is also after a fashion "continuous". Cf. also the sentence }{
\b\lang1033 yonya iny\'eb tye-}{\b\i\lang1033 m\'e9la}{\lang1033 , "I too, my son, I }{\i\lang1033 love}{\lang1033  thee" (LR:61), where Tolkien uses a present tense instead of an aorist: Literally }{\b\lang1033 iny\'eb tye-}{\b\i\lang1033 m\'e9la}{
\lang1033  would seem to mean "I }{\i\lang1033 am loving}{\lang1033  you", but the reference must be to a quite "permanent" emotional state. If anyone else that Tolkien had written this, I would strongly advice the writer to use an aorist (}{\b\lang1033 
mel\'eb}{\lang1033 ) instead of }{\b\lang1033 m\'e9la}{\lang1033  \endash  actually I }{\i\lang1033 still}{\lang1033  think the aorist would be better in this context, even though it was Tolkien who wrote this! But this example confirms that the present t
ense can also be used to describe "general truths" or more or less permanent situations, though this is }{\i\lang1033 more typically}{\lang1033  the domain of the aorist.
\par }{\lang1033\cgrid0 I can well imagine that after this discussion, the student wonders if there is any point in maintaining the aorist and the present as distinct tenses, since their functions seem to overlap to such an extent \endash 
 the only concrete rule being that if some kind of present action cannot in any way be seen as continuous, but is entirely duration-less, one must use the aori
st. In just about all other contexts, either tense will apparently do, and the use of the aorist may not necessarily imply that an action }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 has}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 to be duration-less: For instance, it could also describe a "general truth", or indeed an ongoing action (as in }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 auta}{\lang1033\cgrid0  = "is passing"). The context must be taken into consideration.
\par I can only say that I didn't make this language (another guy did...) Perhaps future publications will throw more light on whatever subtle distinctions Tolkien had in mind. But in the exercis
es I made for this course, I have consistently used aorists for the English simple present, whereas I use the Quenya present tense for the English "is... -ing" construction. I do think writers transposing English usage to Quenya using this formula would g
et it right (or rather, wouldn't make palpable mistakes!) most of the time.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033\cgrid0 
\par That was the }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 function}{\lang1033\cgrid0  of the aorist, difficult though it is to pin down. Now we must discuss how the Quenya aorist is actually }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 formed}{\lang1033\cgrid0 .
\par 
\par It seems that in Primitive Elvish, the rules
 for how the aorist is constructed were quite simple: In the case of a "derived" or A-stem verb, the aorist tense is simply identical to the verbal stem itself (irrespective of the fact that the aorist can of course receive such secondary endings as the p
lural marker -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 r}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , where such is required). No explicit tense-marker had to be present. Regarding the A-stems, this system persists in Quenya. The aorist of a verb like }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 lanta}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
- "to fall" is simply }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 lanta}{\lang1033\cgrid0  "falls" (occurring in }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , there with the plural ending -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 r}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 to agree with its plural subject "leaves": }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 lauri\'eb }{\b\i\lang1033\cgrid0 lantar}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0  lassi}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , "golden }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 fall}{\lang1033\cgrid0  [the] leaves").
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033\cgrid0 In the case of the "primary" or ending-less verbs like }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 mat}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
- "to eat", they originally (in Primitive Elvish) formed their aorist tense by adding the ending -}{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 i}{\lang1033\cgrid0 : "Eats" apparently used to be }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 mati}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
. It is somewhat arguable whether the ending -}{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 i}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 is here strictly an aorist tense-marker. If so, we might have expected to see it in the formation of A-stem aorists as well. Perhaps the rule for aorist formation in Primitive Elvish should rather be stated like this: }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 
The aorist is normally identical to the verbal stem, but in the case of "primary" or ending-less verbal stems, they receive the ending -}{\b\i\lang1033\cgrid0 i}{\i\lang1033\cgrid0  as a kind of stopgap to make up for the absence of any other ending.}{
\lang1033\cgrid0  (I s
hould add that this "simplified" view is not wholly unproblematic, but it works most of the time.) This system essentially persists in Quenya, but the phonological development occurring since Primitive Elvish has added one minor complication: Where final,
 the short -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 i}{\lang1033\cgrid0  of Primitive Elvish was at some point changed to -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 \'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0 . (For instance, the Quenya word }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 mor\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 "black" is said to descend from primitive }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 mori}{\lang1033\cgrid0 : See the entry }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 MOR}{\lang1033\cgrid0  in the }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 Etymologies}{\lang1033\cgrid0 . Where }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 Quenya}{
\lang1033\cgrid0  has a final -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 i}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , it is normally shortened from long }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 -}{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 \'ee }{\lang1033\cgrid0 in the primitive language.) Hence the old form }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 mati}{
\lang1033\cgrid0  "eats" had turned into }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 mat\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0  in Quenya. But since this change only occurred where -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 i}{\lang1033\cgrid0  was }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 final}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , we still see }{
\b\lang1033\cgrid0 mati}{\lang1033\cgrid0 - if the aorist form is to receive any ending, such as -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 r}{\lang1033\cgrid0  in the case of a plural subject. Hence }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 Nauco }{\b\i\lang1033\cgrid0 mat\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 "a Dwarf }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 eats}{\lang1033\cgrid0 ", but with a plural subject }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 Naucor }{\b\i\lang1033\cgrid0 matir}{\lang1033\cgrid0  "Dwarves }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 eat}{\lang1033\cgrid0 ". The ending "shielded" the final -}{
\b\lang1033\cgrid0 i}{\lang1033\cgrid0  so that it was not really final at all, and therefore it did not change to -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 \'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0 .
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033\cgrid0 
\par }{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 NOTE 1: There are a few examples of what seems to be aorist forms where the ending -}{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 \'eb}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0  persists in the form -}{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 e}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 - }{
\i\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 even}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0  if the aorist receives an ending. For instance, what must be the plural aorist of the verb }{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 ettul}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 - "come forth" appears as }{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 
ettuler}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0  (instead of the expected form }{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 ettulir}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 ) in SD:290. Perhaps Tolkien at one stage imagined that the primitive ending -}{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 i}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 
 had become -}{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 e}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0  in }{\i\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 all}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0  positions, even where it was not final \endash  like }{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 ettulir}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0  being altered to }{
\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 ettuler}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0  on analogy with the ending-less form }{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 ettul\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 . But this seems to have been just a passing "phase" in Tolkie
n's evolution of Quenya: In our best late source, the essay }{\i\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 Quendi and Eldar}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0  of about 1960, the plural aorist of }{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 car}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 - "do, make" appears as }{
\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 carir}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 , not **}{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 carer}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0  (WJ:391). Hence Tolkien had reestablished the system he had also used a quarter of a century earlier, in the }{\i\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 
Etymologies}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 . \endash  The form }{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 ettuler}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 
 is (apparently) translated "are at hand" in SD:290; a more literal translation would presumably be "are coming forth". This would confirm that it may be permissible to use the aorist also for ongoing actions; this tense is simply }{
\i\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 unmarked}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 
 regarding the duration of the action, whereas the "present" or "continuous/continuative" tense explicitly identifies an action as ongoing. In our exercises, we will nonetheless use the aorist in the most "typical" way (to denote 
actions that are momentary or habitual/timeless).
\par 
\par NOTE 2: In the case of primary verbs, the aorist and the present tense differ not only regarding the ending. In the present tense, the stem-vowel is lengthened (}{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 m\'e1ta}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 
 "is eating"), whereas in the aorist, it stays short (}{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 mat\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0  "eats"). Yet there are a very few strange forms in our corpus that look like aorists by their ending, but still show a long stem-vowel, e.g. }{
\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 t\'e1p\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0  "stops, blocks" (Etym, entry }{\i\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 TAP}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 ). We would expect }{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 tap\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0  with a short vowel (it is tempting 
to believe that the accent above }{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 a}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0  is just an ink-smear in Tolkien's manuscript...) \endash  It may also be noted that a few }{\i\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 derived}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 
 verbs (A-stems) include an "intrinsically" long vowel, e.g. }{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 c\'fana}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 - "bend",  }{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 s\'faya}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 - "breathe" or }{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 m\'f3ta}{
\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 - "labour, toil". To use the latter verb as an example, its aorist would presumably be }{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 m\'f3ta}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 , even though this may }{\i\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 look}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 
 like the present tense of a non-existing primary verb **}{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 mot}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 -. (We must assume that the actual present tense of }{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 m\'f3ta}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0  would be }{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 
m\'f3t\'eba}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 .)
\par 
\par NOTE 3 (added September 2002): As I have pointed out earlier, one grammatical interpretation presented in this course has proved controversial: the notion that A-stem verbs have present-tense forms in -}{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 \'eba}{
\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 . This admittedly depends on the one example }{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 \'f3r\'eba}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 . Writers who do not want to use the controversial present-tense forms in -}{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 \'eba}{
\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0  may work around the problem by using the aorist instead. After all, Tolkien indicated that a form like }{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 auta}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 
 can be translated "is passing" (not just "passes"), so the aorist can clearly }{\i\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 cover}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0  the function of the English "is ...-ing" construction. Indeed some students of Quenya (who do not accept the -}{
\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 \'eba}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0  theory) believe that in the case of A-stem verbs, there is no distinction between aorist and present tense: Only the context can decide whether }{\b\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 auta}{\fs20\lang1033\cgrid0 
 is best translated "is passing" or simply "passes". This would make the Quenya verb system somewhat asymmetric, but at the present stage, it is simply impossible to reconstruct all of Tolkien's intentions with confidence.}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
\par 
\par }{\i\cf2\lang1033\cgrid0 Summary of Lesson Seven:}{\lang1033\cgrid0  In Quenya, the future tense is formed with the ending -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 uva}{\lang1033\cgrid0 . When added to an A-stem, the -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 a}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 of the stem drops out before this ending; for instance, the future tense of the verb }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 linda}{\lang1033\cgrid0 - "sing" is }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 linduva}{\lang1033\cgrid0  (not **}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 lindauva}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
). Quenya also has a tense termed }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 aorist}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , which differs from the 
present tense in that the latter explicitly describes an on-going action. The aorist says nothing about the duration of the action, and while the use of an aorist form does not }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 preclude}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 that the action denoted is drawn-out or on-going, it seems that this tense is more typically used to describe duration-less, punctual, habitual, characteristic or altogether timeless actions. An example of an aorist is }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 quet\'eb}{
\lang1033\cgrid0  = "speaks", as opposed to present tense }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 qu\'e9ta}{\lang1033\cgrid0  "is speaking". It may be that the Quenya aorist corresp
onds quite well to the English simple present tense ("speaks"), whereas the Quenya present tense rather corresponds to the English "is ...-ing" construction ("is speaking"). In the case of A-stem verbs, the aorist is identical to the verbal stem itself (i
rrespective of any secondary endings the aorist verb may receive). In the case of primary verbs, the aorist tense is formed by means of the ending -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 i}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , which however changes to -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 \'eb}{
\lang1033\cgrid0  if no secondary ending (e.g. -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 r}{\lang1033\cgrid0  for plural) is to follow. Hence the aorist of }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 mat}{\lang1033\cgrid0 - "to eat" is }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 mat\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 "eats" if there is no further ending added to the word, but otherwise we see }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 mati}{\lang1033\cgrid0 - + ending (e.g. }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 matir}{\lang1033\cgrid0  "eat" in the case of a plural subject).
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\cf2\lang1033 VOCABULARY
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\lang1033 enqu\'eb}{\lang1033  "six"
\par }{\b\lang1033 ilya}{\lang1033 , noun/adjective "all, every" }{\fs20\lang1033 ("every" before a singular noun, e.g. }{\b\fs20\lang1033 ilya Elda}{\fs20\lang1033  "every Elf", but }{\b\fs20\lang1033 ilya}{\fs20\lang1033 
 occurring by itself would rather mean "all"). Note that before a plural noun, this word also signifies "all" and is inflected for plural as a common adjective, hence becoming }{\b\fs20\lang1033 ily\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  for older }{\b\fs20\lang1033 ilyai}
{\fs20\lang1033  (cf. }{\b\fs20\lang1033 ily\'eb tier}{\fs20\lang1033  "all paths" in }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  and }{\b\fs20\lang1033 ily\'eb mahalmar}{\fs20\lang1033  "all thrones" in }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Cirion's Oath}{
\fs20\lang1033 )
\par }{\b\lang1033 rimba}{\lang1033 , adjective "numerous", here used for "many" }{\fs20\lang1033 (presumably becoming }{\b\fs20\lang1033 rimb\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  when used in conjunction with plural nouns, if it is inflected like any other adjective \endash 
 hence e.g. }{\b\fs20\lang1033 rimb\'eb r\'e1vi}{\fs20\lang1033  "many lions")}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 Atan}{\lang1033  "Man" }{\fs20\lang1033 (not "sentient male", which is }{\b\fs20\lang1033 n\'e9r}{\fs20\lang1033 
, but Mortal Man as opposed to Immortal Elf, or Dwarf. Within Tolkien's mythos, this word came to be used especially of the Elf-friends of Beleriand and their descendants, the ones called }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Edain}{\fs20\lang1033  or }{\i\fs20\lang1033 D
\'fanedain}{\fs20\lang1033  in Sindarin. But even within the mythos, the word was originally used simply of humans as opposed to Elves, and so do we use it here. Cf. Il\'favatar's words in the }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\fs20\lang1033 
, chapter 1: "Behold the Earth, which shall be a mansion for the Quendi and the Atani [Elves and Men]!")}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 ohtar}{\lang1033  "warrior"
\par }{\b\lang1033 r\'e1}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 r\'e1v}{\lang1033 -) "lion"
\par }{\b\lang1033 Ambar}{\lang1033  "the world" }{\fs20\lang1033 (the Quenya word probably does not require the article }{\b\fs20\lang1033 i}{\fs20\lang1033 ; it is capitalized and apparently treated as a proper name)}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 hr\'e1v\'eb}{\lang1033  "flesh"
\par }{\b\lang1033 macil}{\lang1033  "sword"
\par }{\b\lang1033 fir}{\lang1033 -, verb "die, expire" }{\fs20\lang1033 (cf. the adjective }{\b\fs20\lang1033 firin}{\fs20\lang1033  "dead")}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 tur}{\lang1033 -, verb "govern, control, wield"
\par }{\b\lang1033 or}{\lang1033 , preposition "over, above"
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\cf2\lang1033 EXERCISES 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\lang1033 1. Translate into English:
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\i\lang1033 A.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Rimb\'eb Naucor haryar harmar.}{\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\lang1033 B.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Anar ortuva ar i aiwi linduvar.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 C.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Enqu\'eb neri tiruvar i ando.
\par }{\i\lang1033 D.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Ilya Atan firuva.
\par }{\i\lang1033 E.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Ily\'eb Atani firir.
\par }{\i\lang1033 F.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Saila n\'e9r cenda rimb\'eb parmar.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 G.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Ilya elen sil\'eb or Ambar.
\par }{\i\lang1033 H}{\lang1033 . }{\b\lang1033 I Elda mapa i Nauco.}{\lang1033 
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\lang1033 2. Translate into Quenya:
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 I.}{\lang1033  Every Elf and every Man.
\par }{\i\lang1033 J.}{\lang1033  The Elf will find the Dwarf.
\par }{\i\lang1033 K.}{\lang1033  The horse jumps over the Dwarf.}{\fs20\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 L.}{\lang1033  The king controls many warriors and will control (/rule) all the world.
\par }{\i\lang1033 M.}{\lang1033   The king and the queen will read the book.
\par }{\i\lang1033 N}{\lang1033 . The warrior wields a sword.
\par }{\i\lang1033 O}{\lang1033 . All lions eat flesh.
\par }{\i\lang1033 P.}{\lang1033  Six lions are eating flesh.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\fs36\cf6\lang1033 LESSON EIGHT}{\b\fs32\cf6\lang1033 
\par }{\b\fs32\lang1033 Perfect tense. Pronominal endings -}{\b\i\fs32\lang1033 n}{\i\fs32\lang1033 (}{\b\i\fs32\lang1033 y\'eb}{\i\fs32\lang1033 )}{\b\fs32\lang1033 , -}{\b\i\fs32\lang1033 l}{\i\fs32\lang1033 (}{\b\i\fs32\lang1033 y\'eb}{\i\fs32\lang1033 )}{
\b\fs32\lang1033 , -}{\b\i\fs32\lang1033 s}{\b\fs32\lang1033 .
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\cf2\lang1033 THE PERFECT TENSE
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
Tolkien certainly imagined the Quenya verb to have more tenses than the ones that appear in published material, but only one of these known tenses now remains to be discussed. The last known Quenya tense is the }{\i\lang1033 perfect}{\lang1033 
. (There are still other }{\i\lang1033 forms}{\lang1033  of the verb that we shall have to discuss later, such as the infinitive, the gerund and the imperative, but these don't count as tenses.)
\par \tab Linguistically speaking, English has no perfect tense, just as English has no future tense. However, just as the language quite regularly expresses the }{\i\lang1033 idea}{\lang1033 
 of futurity by involving extra verbs like "shall" or "will", so the }{\i\lang1033 meaning}{\lang1033  of a true perfect tense is typically achieved by means of a circumlocution involving the verb "have". For instance, some typical English
 constructions doing the job of a perfect tense are seen in these sentences: "Peter }{\i\lang1033 has left}{\lang1033 ", "the guests }{\i\lang1033 have eaten}{\lang1033 " (as opposed to a mere past tense: "Peter }{\i\lang1033 left}{\lang1033 
", "the guests }{\i\lang1033 ate}{\lang1033 "). The perfect tense thus describes an action that itself is past, but by using the perfect tense one emphasizes that this past action is somehow still directly relevant for the present moment: "Peter }{
\i\lang1033 has left}{\lang1033  [and he is still gone]", "the guests }{\i\lang1033 have eaten}{\lang1033  [and they are hopefully still satiated as we speak]", etc. \endash  In English
 at least, such constructions may also be used to describe an action that started in the past and still goes on in the present moment: "The king }{\i\lang1033 has ruled}{\lang1033  (or, }{\i\lang1033 has been ruling}{\lang1033 ) for many years."
\par \tab Quenya, unlike English, does have a true perfect tense \endash  a un
itary form of the verb that expresses this meaning, without circumlocutions and extra verbs. Several examples of this perfect tense occurs in LotR. Two of them are found in the chapter }{\i\lang1033 The Steward and the King}{\lang1033 
 in Volume 3. The first example is from }{\i\lang1033 Elendil's Declaration}{\lang1033 , repeated by Aragorn during his coronation. It goes, in part: }{\b\lang1033 Et E\'e4rello Endorenna }{\b\i\lang1033 ut\'falien}{\b\lang1033  = }{\lang1033 
"Out of the Great Sea to Middle-earth }{\i\lang1033 I am come}{\lang1033  [or: }{\i\lang1033 I have come}{\lang1033 ]." Removing the ending -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  meaning "I", we find that the naked present tense "have/has come" is }{\b\lang1033 ut
\'fali\'eb}{\lang1033  (according to the spelling conventions here employed, we must add a diaeresis to -}{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033  when it becomes final). Later in the same chapter, Aragorn finds the sapling of the White Tree, and exclaims: }{
\b\lang1033 Y\'e9! ut\'favienyes!}{\lang1033  "I have found it!" (The word }{\b\lang1033 y\'e9}{\lang1033  is not translated; it is apparently simply an exclamation "Yes!" or "Yeah!") }{\b\lang1033 Ut\'favienyes}{\lang1033  can be broken down as }{
\b\lang1033 ut\'favie-nye-s}{\lang1033  "have found-I-it". We are thus left with }{\b\lang1033 ut\'favi\'eb}{\lang1033  as the perfect tense of a verb }{\b\lang1033 tuv}{\lang1033 - "find". (This verb is not otherwise attested
, unless it can be equated with a verb }{\b\lang1033 tuvu}{\lang1033 - "receive" found in very early [1917] material; see GL:71. Whether this }{\b\lang1033 tuv}{\lang1033 - somehow differs in meaning from }{\b\lang1033 hir}{\lang1033 
-, we cannot know. In the exercises of this course, I always use }{\b\lang1033 hir}{\lang1033 - for "find".)
\par \tab A post-LotR example of a Quenya perfect tense is found in VT39:9, Tolkien mentioning a form }{\b\lang1033 ir\'edci\'eb}{\lang1033  "has twisted" \endash  evidently the perfect tense of a primary verb }{\b\lang1033 ric}{\lang1033 
- "twist" (not otherwise attested, but the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033  lists a primitive root }{\i\lang1033 RIK(H)}{\lang1033 - "jerk, sudden move"). As stated above, the form }{\b\lang1033 ut\'favi\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "has found" seems to presuppose a verb }{\b\lang1033 tuv}{\lang1033 - "find", and }{\b\lang1033 ut\'fali\'eb}{\lang1033  "has come" is the perfect tense of a verb }{\b\lang1033 tul}{\lang1033 - "come" that is attested in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{
\lang1033  (entry }{\i\lang1033 TUL}{\lang1033 -). From these examples it is clear that the perfect tense is formed with the ending -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033 
, but the stem of the verb is also manipulated in other ways. In the case of primary verbs at least, the stem-vowel is }{\i\lang1033 lengthened}{\lang1033 : }{\b\lang1033 ut}{\b\ul\lang1033 \'fa}{\b\lang1033 vi\'eb}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ut}{
\b\ul\lang1033 \'fa}{\b\lang1033 li\'eb}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ir}{\b\ul\lang1033 \'ed}{\b\lang1033 ci\'eb}{\lang1033 .
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 The ardent student will remember that a similar lengthening occurs in the present tense (we would have }{\b\lang1033 t\'fava}{\lang1033  "is finding", }{\b\lang1033 t\'fala}{\lang1033 
 "is coming", }{\b\lang1033 r\'edca}{\lang1033  "is twisting"), but the perfect tense formation differs from the present tense not only in the fact that the former receives the ending -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033  instead of -}{\b\lang1033 a}{
\lang1033 . The perfect, alone of all known Quenya tenses, also receives a kind of prefix. This prefix is variable in form, for it is always the }{\i\lang1033 same as the stem-vowel}{\lang1033  (but short). Hence the verbs }{\b\lang1033 tuv}{\lang1033 
- "find" and }{\b\lang1033 tul}{\lang1033 - "come" become }{\b\ul\lang1033 u}{\b\lang1033 t\'favi\'eb}{\lang1033  and }{\b\ul\lang1033 u}{\b\lang1033 t\'fali\'eb}{\lang1033  in the perfect (I underline the prefix), since their stem-vowel is }{\b\lang1033 
u}{\lang1033 . On the other hand, the verb }{\b\lang1033 ric}{\lang1033 - "twist", with the stem-vowel }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 , turns into }{\b\ul\lang1033 i}{\b\lang1033 r\'edci\'eb}{\lang1033 
 in the perfect tense. Further examples (constructed by me, with underlining of stem-vowel and prefix):
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab Stem-vowel }{\i\lang1033 A}{\lang1033 : }{\b\lang1033 m}{\b\ul\lang1033 a}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 - "eat" vs. }{\b\ul\lang1033 a}{\b\lang1033 m\'e1ti\'eb}{\lang1033  "has eaten"

\par \tab Stem-vowel }{\i\lang1033 E}{\lang1033 : }{\b\lang1033 c}{\b\ul\lang1033 e}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 - "see" vs. }{\b\ul\lang1033 e}{\b\lang1033 c\'e9ni\'eb}{\lang1033  "has seen"
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab Stem-vowel }{\i\lang1033 I}{\lang1033 : }{\b\lang1033 t}{\b\ul\lang1033 i}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 - "watch" vs. }{\b\ul\lang1033 i}{\b\lang1033 t\'edri\'eb}{\lang1033  "has watched"
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab Stem-vowel }{\i\lang1033 O}{\lang1033 : }{\b\lang1033 n}{\b\ul\lang1033 o}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 - "reckon" vs. }{\b\ul\lang1033 o}{\b\lang1033 n\'f3ti\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "has reckoned"
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab Stem-vowel }{\i\lang1033 U}{\lang1033 : }{\b\lang1033 t}{\b\ul\lang1033 u}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 - "govern" vs. }{\b\ul\lang1033 u}{\b\lang1033 t\'fari\'eb}{\lang1033  "has governed"
\par 
\par The prefix seen in the perfect tense is usually referred to as the }{\i\lang1033 augment}{\lang1033 
. It may also be noted that the process of "copying" or "repeating" a part of a word, like the prefixing of stem-vowels seen here, is by a linguistic term called }{\i\lang1033 reduplication}{\lang1033 . So to use as many fancy words as possible, one
 feature of the Quenya perfect tense is that it includes a }{\i\lang1033 reduplicated}{\lang1033  stem-vowel that is }{\i\lang1033 prefixed}{\lang1033  as an }{\i\lang1033 augment}{\lang1033 .
\par \tab So far we have only used examples involving primary verbs. The evidence is actually extremely scarce regarding derived (A-stem) verbs. General principles suggest that they would drop the final -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  before the ending -}{
\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033  is added. For instance, the perfect tense of }{\b\lang1033 lala}{\lang1033 - "laugh" or }{\b\lang1033 mapa}{\lang1033 - "seize" is presumably }{\b\lang1033 al\'e1li\'eb}{\lang1033  "has laughed", }{\b\lang1033 am\'e1pi\'eb}{
\lang1033  "has seized". (Where such a verb has a long stem-vowel, it presumably just stays long in the perfect, where it would have been lengthened anyway. The augment should probably always be a short vowel, though; hence a verb like }{\b\lang1033 m\'f3
ta}{\lang1033 - "toil" may have the perfect tense }{\b\lang1033 om\'f3ti\'eb}{\lang1033  "has toiled".)
\par \tab However, very many A-stems have a consonant cluster following the stem-vowel, e.g. }{\b\lang1033 rn}{\lang1033  following the first A in a verb like }{\b\lang1033 harna}{\lang1033 
- "wound". Since Quenya isn't fond of long vowels immediately in front of consonant clusters, we must assume that the lengthening of the stem-vowels simply
 does not occur in verbs of this shape. Otherwise the perfect tense would be formed according to the normal rules: reduplicate the stem-vowel as an augment and replace final -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  with the ending -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033 
 (so "has wounded" would be }{\b\lang1033 aharni\'eb}{\lang1033 , not **}{\b\lang1033 ah\'e1rni\'eb}{\lang1033 ). We may have some attested examples of }{\i\lang1033 augment-less }{\lang1033 
perfects that are seen to skip the lengthening of the stem-vowel where there is a consonant cluster following it (see below).
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 The numerous A-stems that end in -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033  may be somewhat special. Take a verb like }{\b\lang1033 hanya}{\lang1033 - 
"understand". According to the rules so far given, the perfect "has understood" should be **}{\b\lang1033 ahanyi\'eb}{\lang1033  (or even **}{\b\lang1033 ah\'e1nyi\'eb}{\lang1033  with a lengthened vowel, for it is rather unclear whether }{\b\lang1033 ny}
{\lang1033  here counts as a consonant cluster or a unitary consonant \endash  palatalized }{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  like Spanish }{\b\lang1033 \'f1}{\lang1033 ). However, such a form is impossible, for the combination }{\b\lang1033 yi}{\lang1033 
 does not occur in Quenya.
\par We may have one example to guide us: In }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 , there occurs a perfect tense }{\b\lang1033 av\'e1ni\'eb}{\lang1033  "has passed" (actually it appears in the plural: }{\b\lang1033 y\'e9ni }{\b\i\lang1033 av\'e1nier}{
\b\lang1033  ve lint\'eb yuldar lisse-miruv\'f3reva}{\lang1033  = "years }{\i\lang1033 have passed}{\lang1033  like swift draughts of the sweet mead" \endash  notice that the perfect, like other tenses, receives the ending -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 
 when it occurs with a plural subject). In the essay }{\i\lang1033 Quendi and Eldar}{\lang1033  of ca. 1960, Tolkien explained }{\b\lang1033 av\'e1ni\'eb}{\lang1033  (or }{\b\lang1033 v\'e1ni\'eb}{\lang1033 
 without the augment) as being the perfect tense of the highly irregular verb }{\b\lang1033 auta}{\lang1033 - (WJ:366). But a quarter of a century earlier, in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 , he had listed a verb }{\b\lang1033 vanya}{\lang1033 
- "go, depart, disappear" (see the entry }{\i\lang1033 WAN}{\lang1033 ). It is eminently possibly that }{\i\lang1033 when he actually wrote Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  in the forties, he still thought of (}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 )}{\b\lang1033 v\'e1ni
\'eb}{\lang1033  as the perfect tense of this verb }{\b\lang1033 vanya}{\lang1033 -, though he would later come up with another explanation (perhaps he wanted to eliminate the clash with the adjective }{\b\lang1033 vanya}{\lang1033  "fair"
, though the words would not be difficult to distinguish in context?) If so, Tolkien gave away how to treat verbs in -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033 : In the perfect tense, the whole ending -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033  is dropped before -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb
}{\lang1033  is added, and what remains of the verb is treated just as if it were a primary verb. The perfect tense would therefore show both augment and lengthening of the stem-vowel, something like this:
\par 
\par }{\b\lang1033 hanya}{\lang1033 - "understand", perfect }{\b\lang1033 ah\'e1ni\'eb}{\lang1033  "has understood"
\par }{\b\lang1033 hilya}{\lang1033 - "follow", perfect }{\b\lang1033 ih\'edli\'eb}{\lang1033  "has followed"
\par }{\b\lang1033 telya}{\lang1033 - "finish", perfect }{\b\lang1033 et\'e9li\'eb}{\lang1033  "has finished"
\par }{\b\lang1033 tulya}{\lang1033 - "lead", perfect }{\b\lang1033 ut\'fali\'eb}{\lang1033  "has led"
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par Of course, from the perfect forms you cannot determine with certainty what the original verb stem looks like. For instance, }{\b\lang1033 ih\'edli\'eb}{\lang1033  could also be the perfect of a primary verb **}{\b\lang1033 hil}{\lang1033 
- or a short A-stem **}{\b\lang1033 hila}{\lang1033 -. In this case, no such verb is known to exist, but }{\b\lang1033 ut\'fali\'eb}{\lang1033  would be the perfect not only of }{\b\lang1033 tulya}{\lang1033 
- "lead", but also of the distinct primary verb }{\b\lang1033 tul}{\lang1033 - "come". So one must apparently depend on the context to find out whether the perfect }{\b\lang1033 ut\'fali\'eb}{\lang1033  is formed from }{\b\lang1033 tulya}{\lang1033 
- (so that it means "has led") or from }{\b\lang1033 tul}{\lang1033 - (so that it means "has come"). Same with the perfect }{\b\lang1033 ah\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 : this form would mean "has possessed" if it is formed from }{\b\lang1033 harya}{\lang1033 
, but "has sat, has been sitting" if it is the perfect of }{\b\lang1033 har}{\lang1033 - (apparently a primary verb "sit"; only the plural present tense }{\b\lang1033 h\'e1rar}{\lang1033  "are sitting" is attested: UT:305, 317).
\par 
\par }{\i\lang1033 Verbs including diphthongs:}{\lang1033  In some cases it may be somewhat difficult to determine what the stem-vowel is. Where a verb contains a }{\i\lang1033 diphthong}{\lang1033  in -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 u}{
\lang1033 , it is probably the }{\i\lang1033 first}{\lang1033  vowel of this diphthong that functions as an augment in the perfect tense. For instance, the perfect tense of verbs like }{\b\lang1033 taita}{\lang1033 - "prolong" or }{\b\lang1033 roita}{
\lang1033 - "pursue" would probably be }{\b\lang1033 ataiti\'eb}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 oroiti\'eb}{\lang1033 , and the perfect tense of }{\b\lang1033 hauta}{\lang1033 - "cease, take a rest" is presumably }{\b\lang1033 ahauti\'eb}{\lang1033 
. (The stem-vowel can hardly be lengthened when it's part of a diphthong, so we wouldn't expect to see **}{\b\lang1033 at\'e1iti\'eb}{\lang1033 , **}{\b\lang1033 or\'f3iti\'eb}{\lang1033 , **}{\b\lang1033 ah\'e1uti\'eb}{\lang1033 
.) The original roots of these verbs are given in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033  as }{\i\lang1033 TAY}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 ROY}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 KHAW}{\lang1033 , r
espectively; thus the proper stem-vowels of these verbs are seen to be }{\i\lang1033 A}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 O}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 A}{\lang1033  (again respectively). The final -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 
 seen in the Quenya diphthongs arise from original consonants -}{\i\lang1033 y}{\lang1033  and -}{\i\lang1033 w}{\lang1033 , so they cannot count as stem-vowels.
\par 
\par }{\i\lang1033 Unaugmented perfects:}{\lang1033  The 
material contains some examples of perfect-tense verbs that are constructed according to the rules set forth about, except that they do not have any augment prefixed. MR:250 (reproducing a post-LotR source) mentions a form }{\b\lang1033 f\'edri\'eb}{
\lang1033  "has breathed forth" or in later usage "has died"; the augment is missing, though there is no reason to assume that the "full" form }{\b\lang1033 if\'edri\'eb}{\lang1033  would be wrong. (The actual translation of }{\b\lang1033 f\'edri\'eb}{
\lang1033  given in MR:350 is "she hath breathed forth", but no element meaning "she" can be identified; it is evidently understood.) The verb }{\b\lang1033 av\'e1nier}{\lang1033  "have passed" occurring in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 
 was actually }{\b\lang1033 v\'e1nier}{\lang1033  with no augment in the first edition of LotR; Tolkien supplied the augment in the second edition (1966). Before this, in the essay }{\i\lang1033 Quendi and Eldar}{\lang1033  of about
 1960, he explained the unaugmented variant as being simply a variant form "appearing in verse" (WJ:366). Adding a syllable, as Tolkien did when introducing the full form }{\b\lang1033 av\'e1nier}{\lang1033 
 into the poem in 1966, actually doesn't fit the meter of }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  very well \endash  but he evidently decided to let grammatical accuracy take priority.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 In the other perfects occurring in LotR (}{\b\lang1033 ut\'falien}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ut\'favienyes}{\lang1033 
), the augment was present also in the first edition of 1954-55. Nonetheless, it seems that the whole idea of augmenting perfect
-tense verbs appeared relatively late in Tolkien's evolution of Quenya. In early sources, the augment is missing. For instance, the phrase "the Eldar have come" appears as }{\b\lang1033 i\'b7Eldar tulier}{\lang1033 
 in Tolkien's earliest "Qenya" (LT1:114, 270). The perfect of }{\b\lang1033 tul}{\lang1033 - here appearing features the same ending -}{\b\lang1033 ie}{\lang1033 
- as in LotR-style Quenya, but the augment, as well as the lengthening of the stem-vowel, still have not been introduced into the language. Updating this sentence to LotR-style Quenya by implementing Tolkien's later revisions would probably produce }{
\b\lang1033 Eldar ut\'falier}{\lang1033  (with an augmented perfect and no article before }{\b\lang1033 Eldar}{\lang1033  when it refers to the entire Elvish race).
\par In much later, but still pre-LotR, material, we find }{\b\lang1033 lanti\'eb}{\lang1033  (with a plural subject }{\b\lang1033 lantier}{\lang1033 ) as a form of the verb }{\b\lang1033 lanta}{\lang1033 
- "fall": LR:56. These forms would also seem to be unaugmented perfects, showing the ending -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033  characteristic of this tense. True, Tolkien translated these forms as "fell" (}{\b\lang1033 lanti\'eb nu huin\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "fell under shadow", }{\b\lang1033 \'ebari lantier}{\lang1033  "seas fell") as if they represent some kind of past tense form \endash 
 not perfect "has/have fallen". However, he later noted that "the forms of past and perfect became progressively more closely associated in Quenya" (WJ:366). If this is to mean that Quenya might sometimes use the per
fect where English would rather have a past tense, we can explain "fell" rather than "has/have fallen" as a possible translation of }{\b\lang1033 lanti\'eb}{\lang1033 /}{\b\lang1033 lantier}{\lang1033 
. In SD:310, where Christopher Tolkien discusses a later version of the text in question, he records how his father changed }{\b\lang1033 lantier}{\lang1033  to }{\b\lang1033 lantaner}{\lang1033  \endash 
 apparently substituting a true past tense form for a perfect-used-as-past. 
\par If }{\b\lang1033 lantier}{\lang1033 , sg. }{\b\lang1033 lanti\'eb}{\lang1033 , can indeed be considered a perfect tense form, it would confirm that the stem-vowel cannot be lengthened before a consonant cluster (not **}{\b\lang1033 l\'e1nti\'eb}{
\lang1033 ). Around this stage, Tolkien had certainly introduced such lengthening of the stem-vowel in the perfect; }{\i\lang1033 F\'edriel's Song}{\lang1033  has }{\b\lang1033 c\'e1rier}{\lang1033  for "made" (or "they made", since the plural ending -}{
\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  is included). This form of the verb }{\b\lang1033 car}{\lang1033 - "make, do" would seem to be another perfect-used-as-past, judging from the translation. Since the stem-vowel is lengthened in }{\b\lang1033 c\'e1rier}{\lang1033 
, we must assume that it stays short in }{\b\lang1033 lantier}{\lang1033  for purely phonological reasons: no long vowels are allowed before a consonant cluster. \endash 
 It may be that the absence of the augment in some early sources is simply due to the fact that Tolkien had not invented it yet; in LotR-style Quenya I would recommend }{\b\lang1033 alanti\'eb}{\lang1033  as the perfect tense of }{\b\lang1033 lanta}{
\lang1033 - and }{\b\lang1033 ac\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  as the perfect of }{\b\lang1033 car}{\lang1033 -.
\par Nonetheless, the above-cited example }{\b\lang1033 f\'edri\'eb}{\lang1033  "has breathed forth, has expired" from a post-LotR source (MR:250) would seem to indicate that even in LotR-style Quenya, it is }{\i\lang1033 permissible}{\lang1033 
 to leave out the augment, constructing the perfect simply by means of the ending -}{\b\lang1033 i\'eb}{\lang1033 
 + lengthening of the stem-vowel if there is no consonant cluster following it. Possibly unaugmented perfects are meant to be more common in spoken or informal language, and in poetry one can leave out the augment if the extra syllable would spoil th
e meter (hence }{\b\lang1033 v\'e1nier}{\lang1033  for }{\b\lang1033 av\'e1nier}{\lang1033  in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 
, though Tolkien changed his mind in 1966 and introduced the full form). However, in the exercises I made for this course, all perfect-tense forms do include the augment.
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\lang1033 Verbs beginning in vowels:}{\lang1033  Verbs beginning in a }{\i\lang1033 vowel}{\lang1033 
 pose a problem. Where a verb has a prefix beginning in a vowel, the augment may slip in between the prefix and the most basic verbal stem. For instance, the verb }{\b\lang1033 enyal}{\lang1033 - "recall, remember" is quite literally }{\b\lang1033 en-yal-
}{\lang1033  "re-call", where }{\b\lang1033 yal}{\lang1033 - and not }{\b\lang1033 en}{\lang1033 - is the basic verbal stem incorporating the stem-vowel; in such a case I would expect the perfect to be }{\b\lang1033 enay\'e1li\'eb}{\lang1033 
. But some verbs begin in a vowel even without any prefixed element, e.g. }{\b\lang1033 anta}{\lang1033 - "give". In such a case the first vowel is also the stem-vo
wel, here occurring without any consonant in front of it. A verb may also include a prefix that happens to be identical to the stem-vowel, e.g. }{\b\lang1033 onot}{\lang1033 - "count up" (formed from }{\b\lang1033 not}{\lang1033 - "reckon" with a prefix }
{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033 - meaning "together", hence }{\b\lang1033 onot}{\lang1033 - is literally "reckon together"). Other verbal stems already prefix the stem-vowel as a kind of intensification, e.g. }{\b\lang1033 atalta}{\lang1033 
- "collapse, fall in" (vs. the verb }{\b\lang1033 talta}{\lang1033 - with a somewhat less harsh meaning: "slope, slip, slide down"). In all of these cases, it is difficult to prefix the stem-vowel as an augment in the perfect tense. We cannot well have }{
\b\lang1033 a'anti\'eb}{\lang1033  for "has given", }{\b\lang1033 o'on\'f3ti\'eb}{\lang1033  for "has counted up", }{\b\lang1033 a'atalti\'eb}{\lang1033  for "has collapsed". So what do we get instead?
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 One popular assumption has been that in such cases, the entire first syllable is reduplicated as an augment: Hence the perfect tense of a }{\b\lang1033 anta}{\lang1033 - "give" would be }{
\b\lang1033 ananti\'eb}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 antanti\'eb}{\lang1033 ?), and so on. With the publication of }{\i\lang1033 Vinyar Tengwar}{\lang1033  #41 in July 2000, this theory was }{\i\lang1033 almost}{\lang1033 
 confirmed. It turns out that in a late source, Tolkien listed }{\b\lang1033 or\'f3ri\'eb}{\lang1033  as the perfect tense of the verb }{\b\lang1033 ora}{\lang1033 
- "urge" (VT41:13, 18; actually this form is not explicitly identified as the perfect tense, but it can hardly be anything else). Notice that the entire first syllable (}{\b\lang1033 or}{\lang1033 -) is reduplicated in the perfect: By reduplicating the }{
\i\lang1033 consonant}{\lang1033  following the stem-vowel as well as the stem-vowel itself, the awkward form **}{\b\lang1033 o'\'f3ri\'eb}{\lang1033  is avoided; in }{\b\lang1033 or\'f3ri\'eb}{\lang1033  the reduplicated consonant }{\b\lang1033 r}{
\lang1033  keeps the augment and the initial vowel of the verbal stem comfortably apart. Well and good \endash  the only problem is that after writing down the form }{\b\lang1033 or\'f3ri\'eb}{\lang1033 , Tolkien }{\i\lang1033 struck it out!}{\lang1033 
 Whether this means that we are back on square one, or whether Tolkien struck out the form }{\b\lang1033 or\'f3ri\'eb}{\lang1033  not because he invalidated it but simply because he didn't feel like discussing the perfect tense of }{\b\lang1033 ora}{
\lang1033 - there and then, none can say. 
\par Since it is rather unclear how we should add the augment to most verbs beginning in a vowel, I have simply avoided the perfect tense of such verbs in the exercises I made for this cours
e. But since augmentless perfects seem to be permissible, the easiest solution must be to simply }{\i\lang1033 omit}{\lang1033  the augment in the case of such verbs: }{\b\lang1033 anta}{\lang1033 - "give" becoming }{\b\lang1033 anti\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "has given", }{\b\lang1033 onot}{\lang1033 - "count up" becoming }{\b\lang1033 on\'f3ti\'eb}{\lang1033  "has counted up" (though this is also the perfect of }{\b\lang1033 not}{\lang1033 - "reckon"!), and so on. After the rejected form }{\b\lang1033 or
\'f3ri\'eb}{\lang1033 , Tolkien actually wrote }{\b\lang1033 ori\'eb}{\lang1033 . Was this a replacement perfect tense, with no augment? I would expect }{\b\lang1033 \'f3ri\'eb}{\lang1033  with a lengthened stem-vowel; }{\b\lang1033 ori\'eb}{\lang1033 
 looks more like a quite different form of the verb (a }{\i\lang1033 gerund}{\lang1033 , to be discussed in later lessons). This word may be worth noticing, all the same.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\lang1033\cgrid0 Before leaving the perfect tense, I should briefly comment on a somewhat strange form occurring in the }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 Silmarillion}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , chapter 20. Here we have the exclamation }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 ut\'falie'n aur
\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , translated "the day has come". }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 Ut\'falie}{\lang1033\cgrid0  (}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 ut\'fali\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0 ) is clearly the perfect tense of }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 tul}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
- "come", as confirmed by the translation "has come". However, the added }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 'n}{\lang1033\cgrid0  is something of a mystery. What is this extra consonant doing there? The form }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 ut\'falie'n}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 is reminiscent of }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 ut\'falien}{\lang1033\cgrid0  "I am come" in Elendil's Declaration in LotR, but here -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 n}{\lang1033\cgrid0  is a }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 pronominal}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 ending "I" (see the next section). No such ending can be present in }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 ut\'falie'n}{\lang1033\cgrid0 , given Tolkien's translation. The apostrophe }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 '}{\lang1033\cgrid0  inserted before this latter }{
\b\lang1033\cgrid0 n}{\lang1033\cgrid0  probably indicates a different pronunciation as well; in }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 ut\'falie'n}{\lang1033\cgrid0  the final consonant is perhaps meant to be sounded as a separate syllable. It may be that this }{
\b\lang1033\cgrid0 n}{\lang1033\cgrid0  is added simply for the sake of euphony, preventing three vowels in sequence (since the next word also begins in a vowel; if you count the diphthong }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 au}{\lang1033\cgrid0  in }{
\b\lang1033\cgrid0 aur\'eb }{\lang1033\cgrid0 as two vowels, there would even be }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 four}{\lang1033\cgrid0  sequential vowels). If a perfect tense appears with no secondary ending added to -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 i\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
, and the next word begins in a vowel, should we }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 always}{\lang1033\cgrid0  insert }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 'n}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 to avoid too many vowels in hiatus? I have used such a system in at least one composition of my own, but this conclusion is extremely tentative: In the exercises below I have never used this extra }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 'n}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
, since no one really knows its function. Some even think it represents an alternative incarnation of the article (which normally appears as }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 i}{\lang1033\cgrid0 ): After all, Tolkien did employ the translation "}{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 
the}{\lang1033\cgrid0  day has come". Hence }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 ut\'falie'n aur\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0  = ?}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 ut\'fali\'eb }{\b\i\lang1033\cgrid0 en}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0  aur\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0  or ?}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 ut\'fali\'eb }{
\b\i\lang1033\cgrid0 in}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0  aur\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0  "has-come }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 the}{\lang1033\cgrid0  day"??? (For a possible attestation of }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 in}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 as a Quenya article, see PM:395.) We can only hope that future publications will shed some more light on this. It may be noted that Christopher Gilson, who has access to unpublished Tolkien material, advocates the }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 'n}{
\lang1033\cgrid0  = "the" interpretation.}{\lang1033 
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\cf2\lang1033 PRONOUNS
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 It is time to introduce one of really economic devices of Language, the }{\i\lang1033 pronouns}{\lang1033 
. (If you know perfectly well what a pronoun is, and you also know about the three different "persons" that personal pronouns are divided into, please scroll down until you see the word }{\i\lang1033 Quenya}{\lang1033 
 in red. I'm not trying to waste anyone's time here!)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 The word "pronoun" is a giveaway; it simply means "for (instead of) a noun". Pronouns are words (or endings) that can }{\i\lang1033 replace}{\lang1033 
 a noun, often referring back to a noun that has a
lready been mentioned. Thus you don't have to repeat the noun itself all the time. Pronouns provide a kind of spoken shorthand, saving the language from utter tedium. Thanks to pronouns, speakers of English can keep up a conversation with another people w
ithout having to endlessly repeat the other party's name every time they are being addressed; instead the pronoun }{\i\lang1033 you}{\lang1033 
 is substituted. Instead of having to say "the group just referred to" or "the people presently being discussed" speakers of English have at their disposal the short, snappy word }{\i\lang1033 they}{\lang1033 
. And try to imagine how you would go about referring to yourself without the pronoun }{\i\lang1033 I}{\lang1033 . Phrases like "this person" or "the one who is talking now" get tedious really fast.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab There are several kinds of pronouns (even }{\i\lang1033 interrogative}{\lang1033  ones like "who"), but the ones most frequently found are the }{\i\lang1033 personal pronouns}{\lang1033 
, which we will focus on in this introduction. Customarily, they are divided into three different "persons" (not that the pronouns involved only refer to sentien
t beings; in this context, "person" is just an established term for a pronoun class). In English, this traditional tripartite classification produces a table something like this:
\par 
\par \'a4 }{\i\lang1033 FIRST PERSON}{\lang1033  (referring to oneself or one's own group): Singular }{\i\lang1033 I}{\lang1033 , as object }{\i\lang1033 me}{\lang1033 , of ownership }{\i\lang1033 my}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 mine}{\lang1033 ; plural }{
\i\lang1033 we}{\lang1033 , as object }{\i\lang1033 us}{\lang1033 , of ownership}{\i\lang1033  our}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 ours}{\lang1033 .
\par \'a4 }{\i\lang1033 SECOND PERSON}{\lang1033  (directly addressing another person or another group): Singular and plural both }{\i\lang1033 you}{\lang1033 , which is also the object form; of ownership }{\i\lang1033 your}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 yours}
{\lang1033 . Archaic English also has distinct singular pronouns: }{\i\lang1033 Thou}{\lang1033 , as object }{\i\lang1033 thee}{\lang1033 , of ownership }{\i\lang1033 thy}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 thine}{\lang1033 .
\par \'a4 }{\i\lang1033 THIRD PERSON}{\lang1033  (referring to another person or group): Singular }{\i\lang1033 he}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 she}{\lang1033 , or }{\i\lang1033 it}{\lang1033 
 depending on the gender and/or nature of what is being referred to; as object }{\i\lang1033 him}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 her}{\lang1033 , or }{\i\lang1033 it}{\lang1033  (the latter being the same as the subject form), of ownership }{\i\lang1033 his}{
\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 her}{\lang1033  (the latter happens to coincide with the object form, but there is also }{\i\lang1033 hers}{\lang1033 ) and }{\i\lang1033 its}{\lang1033 . In the plural we have }{\i\lang1033 they}{\lang1033 , as object }{
\i\lang1033 them}{\lang1033 , of ownership }{\i\lang1033 their}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 theirs}{\lang1033 . 
\par 
\par While the concept of these three "persons" as such is near-universal in the languages of the world, it is quite arbitrary what other distinctions languages build into their pronoun tables. The system is not necessarily symmetric, either \endash 
 certainly not so in English. English pronouns }{\i\lang1033 normally}{\lang1033  maintain a distinction of singular vs. plural, e.g. singular }{\i\lang1033 I}{\lang1033  vs. plural }{\i\lang1033 we}{\lang1033 
, but this distinction is suddenly abandoned in the second person, where }{\i\lang1033 you}{\lang1033  is used no matter whether the speaker addresses one person or several peopl
e. On the other hand, English suddenly becomes very pedantic in the third person singular. Here you have to use }{\i\lang1033 he}{\lang1033  if you are referring to a male, }{\i\lang1033 she}{\lang1033  if you are referring to a female (or a ship!), and }
{\i\lang1033 it}{\lang1033  if you are referring to something inanimate or abstract, or to an animal (unless "it" is a pet and you feel you know "it" so intimately that you must consider saying "he" or "she" instead!)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Such hair-splitting distinctions are not made anywhere else in the English pronominal system, and certain other langu
ages dispense with them. Finnish, ever relevant for this study since it was Tolkien's foremost inspiration for Quenya, only has a single word (}{\i\lang1033 h\'e4n}{\lang1033 
) that covers both "he" and "she": The Finns get happily along without making this distinction. On the other h
and, other languages may go even further than English. For instance, the Hebrews apparently thought the masculine/feminine distinction was so interesting that it wasn't enough to have separate words for "he" and "she". Hebrew also has separate words for "
you" (}{\i\lang1033 atta}{\lang1033  when speaking to a man, }{\i\lang1033 att}{\lang1033  when addressing a woman); the language even carries the principle into the plural by having separate words for "they" (}{\i\lang1033 hem}{\lang1033 
 when referring to a group of men, but with reference to an all-female group, "they" is }{\i\lang1033 henna}{\lang1033 ...as I understand it, a mixed group is referred to by the "masculine" term }{\i\lang1033 hem}{\lang1033 
, and then we are left to wonder if a group of 10,000 women and 1 man is still }{\i\lang1033 hem}{\lang1033  rather than }{\i\lang1033 henna}{\lang1033 ).
\par What, then, about }{\cf6\lang1033 Quenya}{\lang1033 ? What pronominal distinctions did Tolkien have his Elves make?
\par It is somewhat difficult to say anything very definite about the Quenya pronominal system. Even now, with enormous amounts of material still unavailable to scholarship, it is already safe to say that the pronouns of Tolkien's Elvish languages we
re rather "unstable" \endash 
 probably even more so than many other aspects of his ever-fluid linguistic constructs. The pronoun tables seem to have undergone countless revisions, and some think Tolkien never quite managed to sort out every detail. (Personally I think he did \endash 
 the problem is rather that he did it so }{\i\lang1033 often}{\lang1033 !)
\par We know that the Quenya pronominal system, as Tolkien envisioned it in his later years, makes some distinctions that are not regularly expressed in English. For one thing, just as Quenya has a }{\i\lang1033 dual}{\lang1033 
 form of the noun in addition to the singular and plural forms, so there are also at least some dual pronouns. So in the First Person we don't find singular "I" and plural "we" only, but also a distinct dual pronoun meaning "you (sg.) and I" or "the tw
o of us". Another subtle distinction is made in the words for "we": In Quenya, there are separate words or endings for "we", depending on whether or not the party that is addressed is included in "we" or not. On the other hand, it seems that Quenya does n
ot always maintain the distinction between "he", "she" and even "it"; all of these may be covered by a single pronoun.
\par As this course proceeds, we will discuss various parts of the pronoun table and their associated obscurities, and also return to the special pronominal distinctions made in Quenya. However, let us introduce a few pronouns right away.
\par One thing should be understood: in Quenya, pronouns typically appear as }{\i\lang1033 endings}{\lang1033 , not so often as independent words. (Where a Quenya pronoun does appear as a separate word, it is often emphatic \endash 
 producing much the same effect as putting an English pronoun in italics: "}{\i\lang1033 You}{\lang1033  [and no one else] did it." We will return to the independent pronouns later.) In the final lines of }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 
 we find the word }{\b\lang1033 hiruvaly\'eb}{\lang1033 , translated "thou shalt find" by Tolkien. If you have worked your way through all the exercises, you will remember the form }{\b\lang1033 hiruva}{\lang1033 , future tense of }{\b\lang1033 hir}{
\lang1033 - "find". This }{\b\lang1033 hiruva}{\lang1033  "shall find" here appears with the }{\i\lang1033 pronominal ending}{\lang1033  -}{\b\lang1033 ly\'eb}{\lang1033  attached, denoting the subject of
 the verb. This ending belongs to the Second Person and signifies "thou" \endash  or using a less archaic translation, "you". Hence }{\b\lang1033 hiruvaly\'eb}{\lang1033  = "thou shalt find", or "you will find". The suffix -}{\b\lang1033 ly\'eb}{
\lang1033  can be attached to any verb to indicate that its subject is "you, thou".
\par Having mentioned this pronoun we however run into Instant Obscurity, which is a situation we shall often find ourselves in while discussing Quenya pronouns. It is unclear whether or not this ending -}{\b\lang1033 ly\'eb}{\lang1033 
 covers both singular and plural "you"; in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 
 it is singular, as demonstrated by the translation "thou". In one of Tolkien's draft texts for the LotR Appendices, he actually wrote that the Elvish languages did not distinguish between singular and plural "you" (no more than English does): "All th
ese languages...had, or originally had, no distinction between the singular and plural of the second person pronouns; but they had a marked distinction between the }{\i\lang1033 familiar}{\lang1033  forms and the }{\i\lang1033 courteous}{\lang1033 
" (PM:42-43). The ending -}{\b\lang1033 ly\'eb}{\lang1033 , used by Galadriel to address a relative stranger like Frodo, would seem to be a polite or courteous "you". In }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 
 it is thus used as a singular "thou", only one person being addressed, but according to PM:42-43 just quoted it could equally well be plural "you" (so if all the membe
rs of the Fellowship had understood Quenya, they still couldn't be certain whether Galadriel was addressing them all, or Frodo alone).
\par However, in the essay }{\i\lang1033 Quendi and Eldar}{\lang1033  written about half a decade after the publication of LotR, Tolkien did imply the e
xistence of pronominal endings that make a distinction between singular and plural "you" (WJ:364). Here he referred to "reduced pronominal affixes of the 2nd person", implied to be -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  in the singular and -}{\b\lang1033 l}{
\lang1033  in the plural. This -}{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033  could well be a "reduced" form of -}{\b\lang1033 ly\'eb}{\lang1033 , which would then be a }{\i\lang1033 plural}{\lang1033  "you". Even so, Tolkien indisputably used this ending for a }{
\i\lang1033 singular}{\lang1033  "you" in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 , since he translated it as "thou" in the text in LotR. This shorter ending -}{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033  is also attested as part of the verb }{\b\lang1033 hami}{
\b\ul\lang1033 l}{\lang1033  "you j
udge" (VT42:33), and this may also be taken as a singular "you", though the context is not conclusive either way. It would seem that in the second half of the fifties, Tolkien had been rethinking the pronominal system. The statement made in the draft text
 
for the LotR Appendices, to the effect that Elvish did not distinguish singular and plural "you", had not actually made it into the published LotR. Therefore he would not be bound by it. (Whenever we are dealing with Tolkien material that has been publish
ed only posthumously, we can never be certain that the information provided is entirely "canonical": The author could always change his mind, and so he often did, especially regarding the languages.)
\par Tolkien had apparently discovered that Quenya possesses distinct pronouns for singular and plural "you" after all. Perhaps the new (ca. 1960) idea goes something like this: -}{\b\lang1033 ly\'eb}{\lang1033  and the shorter variant -}{\b\lang1033 l}{
\lang1033  would }{\i\lang1033 properly}{\lang1033  be a plural "you", but it is also used as a }{\i\lang1033 polite singular}{\lang1033 , hence the translation "thou" in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 
. The idea of addressing a single person as if (s)he were several people could be a way of showing respect, emphasizing the importance of the other. Parallels are found in languages of our own world. (A former British PM on occasion carried this sys
tem over from the Second Person to the First, referring to }{\i\lang1033 herself}{\lang1033  as a plural "we" rather than a singular "I", apparently to emphasize her own importance. Of course, royals have been using this linguistic device for centuries 
\endash  and for that matter, even t
he author of this course sometimes refers to himself as "we"! But actually I tend to include the reader in this "we", so that you quite undeservedly receive some of the credit for the gradual unraveling of Quenya grammar that "we" are undertaking here...)
 As for English "thou" vs. "you", Matthew Skala wrote on the Elfling list (January 4, 2001):
\par 
\par }\pard \li708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033\cgrid0 "}{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 Thou}{\lang1033\cgrid0 " is second person singular, and "}{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 you}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
" is second person plural, with the added rule that in formal contexts it's polite to use plural even when talking to an individual.  Much like French "}{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 tu}{\lang1033\cgrid0 " (singular/informal) and "}{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 vous}{
\lang1033\cgrid0 " (plural/formal).  In English it has become standard to use "you" for both singular and plural regardless of politeness, but that is a recent innovation; until about 100-200 years ago, Englis
h speakers routinely used "thou" in informal contexts. The bizarre situation today is that because of this historical change, most of us only ever encounter "}{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 thou}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
" in historical and formal contexts, such as the Bible... and so now, if you use it you sound like you're being especially formal and polite.  The "formality/politeness" charge has been flipped backwards.
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033\cgrid0 It may be, then, that Quenya -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 ly\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0  or -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 l}{\lang1033\cgrid0  corresponds to the }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 original}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 use of English "you", before the historical change Skala describes \endash  but because of that change, -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 l}{\lang1033\cgrid0 (}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 y\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
) used as a polite singular may now be rendered "thou", as Tolkien translated it in LotR.}{\lang1033 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 To summarize: the ending -}{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 (}{\b\lang1033 y\'eb}{\lang1033 ) can }{\i\lang1033 certainly}{\lang1033  be used as a singular "you", and it is }{\i\lang1033 probably}{
\lang1033  a polite/courteous form rather than a familiar/intimate form. It }{\i\lang1033 may}{\lang1033  be that -}{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 (}{\b\lang1033 y\'eb}{\lang1033 
) also covers plural "you", this may even be its proper meaning, but this is where things get somewhat obscure. Tolkien probably changed his mind back and forth about the details. In the exercises below, I have simply us
ed the neutral word "you" as the equivalent of -}{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 (}{\b\lang1033 y\'eb)}{\lang1033 . Then it is impossible to go wrong.
\par But we seem to have plunged right into the Second Person; let us return to the First. In the First Person singular, things are luckily crystal clear (well, very nearly so). The pronoun "I" is most often represented by the ending -}{\b\lang1033 n}{
\lang1033 . (Linguists have noted that in the languages of the world, the term for "I, me" remarkably often includes some nasal sound like N or M. Whatever subtle features of human psychology underlie 
this phenomenon, Tolkien seems to have liked this association, and worked it into several of his languages. Cf. Sindarin }{\i\lang1033 im}{\lang1033  = "I".) Notice how the ending -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  is added to the verbs }{\b\lang1033 ut\'fali
\'eb}{\lang1033  (perfect tense of }{\b\lang1033 tul}{\lang1033 - "come") and }{\b\lang1033 maruva}{\lang1033  (future tense of }{\b\lang1033 mar}{\lang1033 - "abide, dwell") in Elendil's Declaration:
\par 
\par }{\b\lang1033 Et E\'e4rello Endorenna }{\b\i\lang1033 ut\'falie}{\b\i\ul\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  }{\lang1033\cgrid0 = "out of the Great Sea to Middle-earth }{\i\ul\lang1033\cgrid0 I}{\i\lang1033\cgrid0  am come}{\lang1033\cgrid0 ."}{\i\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 Sinom\'eb }{\b\i\lang1033 maruva}{\b\i\ul\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  = "in this place }{\i\lang1033 will }{\i\ul\lang1033 I}{\i\lang1033  abide}{\lang1033 ".
\par 
\par However, the ending -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  for "I" also occurs as a longer variant, -}{\b\lang1033 ny\'eb}{\lang1033 . (As noted above, the ending -}{\b\lang1033 ly\'eb}{\lang1033  for "you" has a shorter variant -}{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 
; the variation -}{\b\lang1033 ny\'eb}{\lang1033  vs. -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  for "you" would parallel this.) This longer variant is seen in a word we have already touched on in this lesson, the form }{\b\lang1033 ut\'favienyes!}{\lang1033 
 "I have found it!" \endash  Aragorn's exclamation when he found the discovered the sapling of the White Tree. The word }{\b\lang1033 ut\'favi\'eb}{\lang1033 , apparently the perfect tense of a verb }{\b\lang1033 tuv}{\lang1033 - "find", here occurs with 
}{\i\lang1033 two}{\lang1033  pronominal endings. The first of them, -}{\b\lang1033 ny\'eb}{\lang1033  or "I", denotes the subject of the verb: }{\b\lang1033 Ut\'favie+ny\'eb}{\lang1033  "have found+I" = "I have found". However, following -}{\b\lang1033 
ny\'eb}{\lang1033  we have yet another pronominal ending, the Third Person Singular suffix -}{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 , meaning "it". Thus an entire sentence of verb, subject and object has been telescoped into a single word: }{\b\cf6\lang1033 ut\'favie}
{\b\cf2\lang1033 nye}{\b\cf5\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  = "}{\cf2\lang1033 I}{\lang1033  }{\cf6\lang1033 have found}{\lang1033  }{\cf5\lang1033 it}{\lang1033 ". 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\fs20\lang1033 NOTE: Notice that according to the spelling conventions here employed, final -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 \'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  loses its diaeresis whenever an ending is added so that it is not final anymore: }{\b\fs20\lang1033 ut\'favi\'eb}{
\fs20\lang1033  + -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 ny\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  = }{\b\fs20\lang1033 ut\'favi}{\b\fs20\ul\lang1033 e}{\b\fs20\lang1033 ny\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  and not }{\b\fs20\lang1033 ut\'favi}{\b\fs20\ul\lang1033 \'eb}{\b\fs20\lang1033 ny\'eb}{
\fs20\lang1033 ; adding -}{\b\fs20\lang1033 s}{\fs20\lang1033  to }{\b\fs20\lang1033 ut\'favieny\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  likewise produces }{\b\fs20\lang1033 ut\'favieny}{\b\fs20\ul\lang1033 e}{\b\fs20\lang1033 s}{\fs20\lang1033  and not }{\b\fs20\lang1033 
ut\'favieny}{\b\fs20\ul\lang1033 \'eb}{\b\fs20\lang1033 s}{\fs20\lang1033 . This is solely a matter of orthography.
\par }{\lang1033 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033  We can abstract this grammatical rule: if a verb is to receive }{\i\lang1033 two}{\lang1033 
 pronominal endings, one denoting the subject of the verb and the second the object, the subject ending is attached first and the object ending next. In published material, there are two or three other examples of this, beside }{\b\lang1033 ut\'favienyes}
{\lang1033 .
\par It is then obvious why the long form -}{\b\lang1033 nye}{\lang1033 - is preferred here. While }{\b\lang1033 ut\'favie}{\b\ul\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  would do nicely for "}{\ul\lang1033 I}{\lang1033  have found", the object ending -}{\b\lang1033 s}{
\lang1033  "it" could not have been added to the short ending -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 , since **}{\b\lang1033 ut\'faviens}{\lang1033  is not a possible Quenya word. So we can formulate another rule: The long form -}{\b\lang1033 ny\'eb}{\lang1033  (-}{
\b\lang1033 nye}{\lang1033 -), NOT short -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 , must be used for "I" if another pronominal ending is to follow it. (Similarly, for "you" one }{\i\lang1033 must}{\lang1033  use the long ending -}{\b\lang1033 ly\'eb}{\lang1033  [-}{
\b\lang1033 lye}{\lang1033 -], not the shorter form -}{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 , if a second pronominal ending is to be added: "You have found" could be either }{\b\lang1033 ut\'faviel}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 ut\'faviely\'eb}{\lang1033 
, but "you have found }{\i\lang1033 it}{\lang1033 " must be }{\b\lang1033 ut\'favielyes}{\lang1033 , since **}{\b\lang1033 ut\'faviels}{\lang1033  would be impossible.)
\par The long ending -}{\b\lang1033 ny\'eb}{\lang1033  "I" may however occur even if there is no object pronoun following it (as can the long form -}{\b\lang1033 ly\'eb}{\lang1033  for "you, thou", cf. }{\b\lang1033 hiruvaly\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "thou shalt find" in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 ). The form }{\b\lang1033 linduvany\'eb}{\lang1033  "I shall sing" occurs on the frontispiece of the 1975 French bilingual edition of }{\i\lang1033 The Adventures of Tom Bombadil}{\lang1033 
 (ISBN 2-264-00913-6). The frontispiece reproduces a manuscript page by Tolkien, including some brief linguistic notes. (Taum Santoski, analyzing these notes in the newsletter }{\i\lang1033 Beyond Bree}{\lang1033 , October 19
85, read this form as "linduvanya" \endash 
 but as pointed out by Carl F. Hostetter, Tolkien probably intended "linduvanye" instead. Tolkien was capable of wonderful calligraphy, but his normal handwriting is often a challenge to transcribers!) As long as no seco
nd pronominal ending is to follow, it is apparently wholly optional whether one uses the long ending -}{\b\lang1033 ny\'eb}{\lang1033  or the short ending -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  for "I". We have the long ending in }{\b\lang1033 linduvany\'eb}{
\lang1033  "I shall sing", but Elendil's Declaration uses the short ending in }{\b\lang1033 maruvan}{\lang1033  "I will abide". Certainly these examples could be scrambled to produce }{\b\lang1033 linduvan}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 maruvany\'eb}{
\lang1033  of exactly the same meaning.
\par It seems, however, that the short ending -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  is much more common than the longer suffix -}{\b\lang1033 ny\'eb}{\lang1033 . We have already encountered this -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  attached to several verbs, such as }{
\b\lang1033 polin}{\lang1033  "I can", }{\b\lang1033 tirin}{\lang1033  "I watch" in the previous lesson. Tolkien very often cites primary verbs like this, listing them as they appear in the 1st person aorist (with the ending -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 
- intact because it is followed by an ending and hence not final, so that it would become -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033 ). }{\b\lang1033 Tirin}{\lang1033  is an example actually found in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033  (entry }{\i\lang1033 TIR}
{\lang1033 ), but by the standards of this field, examples truly abound: }{\b\lang1033 carin}{\lang1033  "I make, build" (entry }{\i\lang1033 KAR}{\lang1033 ), }{\b\lang1033 lirin}{\lang1033  "I sing" }{\i\lang1033 (GLIR)}{\lang1033  or "I chant" }{
\i\lang1033 (LIR}{\i\lang1033\super 1}{\i\lang1033 )}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 nutin }{\lang1033 "I tie" }{\i\lang1033 (NUT)}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 nyarin}{\lang1033  "I tell" }{\i\lang1033 (NAR}{\i\lang1033\super 2}{\i\lang1033 )}{\lang1033 , }{
\b\lang1033 rerin}{\lang1033  "I sow" }{\i\lang1033 (RED)}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 serin}{\lang1033  "I rest" }{\i\lang1033 (SED)}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 sucin}{\lang1033  "I drink" }{\i\lang1033 (SUK)}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 tamin}{\lang1033 
 "I tap" }{\i\lang1033 (TAM)}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 tucin}{\lang1033  "I draw" }{\i\lang1033 (TUK)}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 tulin}{\lang1033  "I come" }{\i\lang1033 (TUL)}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 turin}{\lang1033  "I wield" }{\i\lang1033 (TUR)}{
\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 tyavin}{\lang1033  "I taste" }{\i\lang1033 (KYAP)}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 vilin}{\lang1033  "I fly" }{\i\lang1033 (WIL)}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 umin}{\lang1033  "I do not" }{\i\lang1033 (UGU/UMU)}{\lang1033 . The form }{
\b\lang1033 polin}{\lang1033  "I can" (VT41:6) is one of several examples from post-LotR sources. Presumably it would in no way be wrong to use the long ending -}{\b\lang1033 ny\'eb}{\lang1033  instead (e.g. }{\b\lang1033 poliny\'eb}{\lang1033 ), but -}{
\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  is the commonest ending in the published corpus. But especially for the 
purpose of poetry, it is often practical to be able to choose between a long and a short pronominal ending, so that one can include or get rid of a syllable if the meter demands this.
\par Also notice that the ending -}{\b\lang1033 ny\'eb}{\lang1033 , as well as -}{\b\lang1033 ly\'eb}{\lang1033  for "you", cause the accent to fall on the syllable preceding the ending because }{\b\lang1033 ny}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 ly}{\lang1033 
 here count as consonant clusters. Cf. the stress rules set out in Lesson One. If }{\b\lang1033 hiruvany\'eb}{\lang1033  "I will find" (with the accent on }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 ) doesn't sound good in your poem, you can always use the short form }{
\b\lang1033 hiruvan}{\lang1033  and have the accent land on }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  in the first syllable instead. (Again, we may have the same system in the Second Person: It is entirely possible that in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 
, Tolkien wrote }{\b\lang1033 hiruvaly\'eb}{\lang1033  rather than the shorter form }{\b\lang1033 hiruval}{\lang1033  simply because the former variant fit his poetic meter better.)
\par As for the ending -}{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  meaning "it", occurring as an object pronoun in }{\b\lang1033 ut\'favienyes}{\lang1033  "I have found it", it seems that it may also be used as a subject. For instance, if }{\b\lang1033 polin}{\lang1033 
 is "I can", we must assume that "it can" would be }{\b\lang1033 polis}{\lang1033 . However, the ending -}{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 
 brings us into the Third Person with its own set of obscurities, which we will save for later (Lesson 15). In the exercises below, -}{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  is used in the same way as in the example }{\b\lang1033 ut\'favienyes}{\lang1033 
: attached to another pronominal ending to denote the }{\i\lang1033 object}{\lang1033  of the verb (just as the first ending added to the verb denotes its }{\i\lang1033 subject}{\lang1033 ).
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\i\cf2\lang1033\cgrid0 Summary of Lesson Eight:}{\lang1033\cgrid0  The Quenya perfect tense is formed by adding the ending -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 i\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0  to the verbal stem (if the stem ends in a vowel, it is apparently omitted before -}
{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 i\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0  is added; verbs in -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 ya}{\lang1033\cgrid0  seem to loose this entire ending). Unless followed by a consonant cluster, the stem-vowel is lengthened. Normally it is also reduplicated as an }{
\i\lang1033\cgrid0 augment}{\lang1033\cgrid0  prefixed to the verb (}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 r}{\b\ul\lang1033\cgrid0 i}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 c}{\lang1033\cgrid0 - "twist" vs. }{\b\ul\lang1033\cgrid0 i}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 r\'edci\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 "has twisted", }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 h}{\b\ul\lang1033\cgrid0 a}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 nya}{\lang1033\cgrid0 - "understand" vs. }{\b\ul\lang1033\cgrid0 a}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 h\'e1ni\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 "has understood"). However, there also appear some unaugmented perfects in the published corpus (notably }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 f\'edri\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0  rather than }{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 if\'edri\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0 
 for "has expired"), so it may be permissible to leave out the augment and still have a valid perfect tense form. It is somewhat unclear how the augment is to be prefixed to verbal stems beginning in a vowel. \endash  Quenya }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 pronouns}
{\lang1033\cgrid0  most typically appear as endings rather than separate words. Among these pronominal endings we have -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 n}{\lang1033\cgrid0  or -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 ny\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0  "I", -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 l}{
\lang1033\cgrid0  or -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 ly\'eb}{\lang1033\cgrid0  "thou, you" and -}{\b\lang1033\cgrid0 s}{\lang1033\cgrid0  "it". Two pronominal endings may be added to the same verb, the first of them denoting the }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 subject}{
\lang1033\cgrid0  of the verb, the second its }{\i\lang1033\cgrid0 object}{\lang1033\cgrid0 .}{\lang1033 
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\cf2\lang1033 VOCABULARY
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\lang1033 otso}{\lang1033  "seven"
\par }{\b\lang1033 seldo}{\lang1033  "boy" }{\fs20\lang1033 (actually Tolkien didn't provide an explicit gloss, but the word is cited in a context where he is discussing Quenya words for "child", and }{\b\fs20\lang1033 seldo}{\fs20\lang1033 
 seems to be a masculine form. See the entry }{\i\fs20\lang1033 SEL-D-}{\fs20\lang1033  in the }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Etymologies}{\fs20\lang1033 .)}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 m\'f3l}{\lang1033  "thrall, slave"
\par }{\b\lang1033 an}{\lang1033  "for" }{\fs20\lang1033 (or "since, because", introducing a sentence giving a }{\i\fs20\lang1033 reason}{\fs20\lang1033 , as in "I rely on him, }{\fs20\ul\lang1033 for}{\fs20\lang1033  he has often been of help to me".)}{
\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 tul}{\lang1033 - verb "come"
\par }{\b\lang1033 lanta}{\lang1033 - verb "fall"
\par }{\b\lang1033 nurta}{\lang1033 - verb "hide" }{\fs20\lang1033 (cf. the }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Nurtal\'eb Valin\'f3reva}{\fs20\lang1033  or "Hiding of Valinor" referred to in the }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\fs20\lang1033 )}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 lerya}{\lang1033 - verb "release, (set) free, let go"
\par }{\b\lang1033 metya}{\lang1033 - verb "end" = "put an end to"
\par }{\b\lang1033 roita}{\lang1033 - verb "pursue"
\par }{\b\lang1033 laita}{\lang1033 - verb "bless, praise"
\par }{\b\lang1033 imb\'eb}{\lang1033  preposition "between"}{\fs20\lang1033 
\par }{\lang1033 
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\cf2\lang1033 EXERCISES 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par 1. Translate into English (and practice your vocabulary; except for the numeral }{\b\lang1033 otso}{\lang1033  and the pronominal endings, exercises }{\i\lang1033 A}{\lang1033 -}{\i\lang1033 H}{\lang1033  only employ words you ar
e supposed to have memorized in earlier lessons):
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\i\lang1033 A.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 I n\'e9r ih\'edri\'eb i harma.}{\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\lang1033 B.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 I r\'e1vi am\'e1tier i hr\'e1v\'eb.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 C.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 I aran utulti\'eb i t\'e1ri.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 D.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 I nissi ecendier i parma.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 E.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 I \'fam\'eba t\'e1ri am\'e1pi\'eb i otso Naucor.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 F.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Et\'e9ciely\'eb otso parmar.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 G.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Equ\'e9tien.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 H}{\lang1033 . }{\b\lang1033 Ec\'e9nielyes.}{\lang1033  
\par 
\par 2. Translate into Quenya:
\par 
\par }{\i\lang1033 I.}{\lang1033  The man has come.
\par }{\i\lang1033 J.}{\lang1033  The seven Dwarves have eaten.
\par }{\i\lang1033 K.}{\lang1033  The boys have seen a lion between the trees.}{\b\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 L.}{\lang1033  The six Elves have pursued the seven Dwarves.
\par }{\i\lang1033 M.}{\lang1033  The Dwarf has hidden a treasure.
\par }{\i\lang1033 N}{\lang1033 . I have praised the king, for the king has released all thralls.
\par }{\i\lang1033 O}{\lang1033 . You have fallen, and I have seen it.
\par }{\i\lang1033 P.}{\lang1033  I have put an end to it [/I have ended it].
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\fs36\cf6\lang1033 LESSON NINE}{\b\fs32\cf6\lang1033 
\par }{\b\fs32\lang1033 The infinitive. The negative verb. Active participles.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\cf2\lang1033 THE INFINITIVE
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 All of the forms of the verb that we have discussed so far, all the tenses, are what a linguist would call }{\i\lang1033 finite}{\lang1033 
 verb forms. The definition of a finite verb is that it is capable of functioning as the }{\i\lang1033 predicate}{\lang1033  of a sentence, the part of the sentence that tells us what the subject does (or }{\i\lang1033 is}{\lang1033  \endash 
 in Lesson Four we pointed out that a phrase made up of copula + noun or adjective also counts as a predicate, e.g. "gold }{\ul\lang1033 is beautiful}{\lang1033 ", but here we will deal with more normal verbs instead). In a sentence like }{\b\lang1033 
i Elda m\'e1ta massa}{\lang1033  "the Elf is eating bread", linguists can readily label the roles of all parts of the sentence: just like }{\b\lang1033 i Elda}{\lang1033  "the Elf" is the subject and }{\b\lang1033 massa}{\lang1033 
 "bread" is the object, so the verb }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1ta}{\lang1033  "is eating" is the }{\i\lang1033 predicate}{\lang1033  of the sentence. And precisely because the form }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1ta}{\lang1033 , present tense of }{\b\lang1033 mat}{\lang1033 
- "eat", is able to function as a predicate here, we can tell that }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1ta}{\lang1033  is a }{\i\lang1033 finite}{\lang1033  form of the verb.
\par \tab The infinitive is another story. It is, as the name suggests, in-finite \endash  non-finite. It is not inflected for time, as are the tenses. It does not receive the ending -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 ,
 even if the subject of the sentence is plural. So by itself, an infinitive is }{\i\lang1033 not}{\lang1033  capable of functioning as the predicate of a sentence. An infinitive cannot be directly teamed up with a subject. What, then, is its use?
\par \tab English infinitives have various uses, but an important function of the infinitive is that it allows }{\i\lang1033 several}{\lang1033 
 verbs to be combined in one sentence. In a sentence like "the Dwarves wanted to eat", the verb "wanted" is a finite form, appearing in one specific tense (in this case past tense). 
But the verb "eat" appears as an infinitive, "to eat", complementing the finite verb to form a longer verbal phrase "wanted to eat". In English, infinitive verbs are very often marked by inserting "to" before the verb proper, but this "to" is not always i
ncluded. In a sentence like "I let him }{\i\lang1033 go}{\lang1033 ", the verb "go" counts as an infinitive even though there is no "to" before it. (Contrast "I allowed him }{\i\lang1033 to go}{\lang1033 
".) Neither is "to" included before an infinitive following certain verbs like "can" or "must" (e.g. "I must }{\ul\lang1033 go}{\lang1033 ", not **"I must }{\ul\lang1033 to go}{\lang1033 ").
\par \tab In Quenya, there seems to be no independent infinitive marker like English "to", so we don't have to worry about where to include or omit it. Attested examples of Quenya infinitives most certainly do not abound, but there is the sentence }{
\b\lang1033 polin quet\'eb}{\lang1033  "I can speak" (VT41:6). Here the verb }{\b\lang1033 polin}{\lang1033  "I can" is a finite form, the aorist of the primary verb }{\b\lang1033 pol}{\lang1033 - appearing with the pronominal ending -}{\b\lang1033 n}{
\lang1033  "I" attached \endash  but the word }{\b\lang1033 quet\'eb}{\lang1033  must be analyzed as an infinitive. Of course, }{\b\lang1033 quet\'eb}{\lang1033 
 is similar in form to an aorist "speaks", but as indicated by the translation "speak" as well as the context, the form }{\b\lang1033 quet\'eb}{\lang1033  is infinitival here. We can tell, then, that primary verbs like }{\b\lang1033 quet}{\lang1033 
- have infinitives in -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  (undoubtedly representing Primitive Elvish -}{\i\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 ). The ending may be analyzed simply as a kind of stopgap that is supplied to make up for the absence of any other ending, or }{
\b\lang1033 quet\'eb}{\lang1033  may be seen as representing an uninflected primitive "I-stem" }{\i\lang1033 kweti}{\lang1033 . No matter how we imagine the ultimate derivation and the "meaning" of the ending -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033 
, we probably know enough to actually start using the infinitive form of primary verbs. Here are some (home-made) examples combining infinitives with various finite forms (tenses) of the verbs }{\b\lang1033 mer}{\lang1033 - "wish, want" and }{\b\lang1033 
pol}{\lang1033 - "can". Finite verbs in }{\cf6\lang1033 red}{\lang1033 , infinitives in }{\cf2\lang1033 blue}{\lang1033 :
\par 
\par }{\b\lang1033 I Elda }{\b\cf6\lang1033 pol\'eb}{\b\lang1033  }{\b\cf2\lang1033 cen\'eb}{\b\lang1033  i Nauco}{\lang1033  "the Elf }{\cf6\lang1033 can}{\lang1033  }{\cf2\lang1033 see}{\lang1033  the Dwarf" }{\i\fs20\lang1033 (notice that though the verbs }
{\b\i\fs20\lang1033 pol}{\i\fs20\lang1033 - "want" and }{\b\i\fs20\lang1033 cen}{\i\fs20\lang1033 - "see, behold" receive the same ending -}{\b\i\fs20\lang1033 \'eb}{\i\fs20\lang1033  here, the former is an aorist and the latter is an infiniti
ve: The context must decide whether the form }{\b\i\fs20\lang1033 cen\'eb}{\i\fs20\lang1033  is to be understood as an aorist "sees" or an infinitive "[to] see")}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 I Naucor }{\b\cf6\lang1033 merner}{\b\lang1033  }{\b\cf2\lang1033 mat\'eb }{\lang1033 "the Dwarves }{\cf6\lang1033 wanted}{\lang1033  }{\cf2\lang1033 to eat}{\lang1033 " }{\i\fs20\lang1033 (finite verb }{\b\i\fs20\lang1033 merner}{
\i\fs20\lang1033  "wanted", inflected for past tense and plural, + infinitive verb }{\b\i\fs20\lang1033 mat\'eb}{\i\fs20\lang1033  "to eat")}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 I seldo }{\b\cf6\lang1033 poll\'eb}{\b\lang1033  }{\b\cf2\lang1033 hlar\'eb }{\b\lang1033 ilya quetta}{\lang1033  "the boy }{\cf6\lang1033 could}{\lang1033  }{\cf2\lang1033 hear}{\lang1033  every word"
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\cf6\lang1033 Poli}{\b\cf1\lang1033 ly\'eb}{\b\lang1033  }{\b\cf2\lang1033 car\'eb}{\b\lang1033  ilqua}{\lang1033  "you }{\cf6\lang1033 can}{\lang1033  }{\cf2\lang1033 do}{\lang1033  everything"

\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\lang1033 I nissi }{\b\cf6\lang1033 meruvar}{\b\lang1033  }{\b\cf2\lang1033 tul\'eb}{\lang1033  "the women }{\cf6\lang1033 will want}{\lang1033  }{\cf2\lang1033 to come}{\lang1033 "
\par 
\par What, then, about A-stems? In the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 , Tolkien often glossed A-stem verbs as if they were infinitives, e.g. }{\b\lang1033 anta}{\lang1033 - "to present, give", }{\b\lang1033 varya}{\lang1033 - "to protect" or }{
\b\lang1033 yelta}{\lang1033 - "to loathe" (entries }{\i\lang1033 ANA}{\i\lang1033\super 1}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 BAR}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 DYEL}{\lang1033 ). This is not by itself conclusive evidence that a form like }{\b\lang1033 anta}{
\lang1033  could actually be used as an infinitive "to give" in a Quenya text
, for in the tradition of Western linguistics, the infinitive is commonly the form used to name, list or gloss a verb in wordlists. Sometimes this system is carried through even where such a gloss is strictly wrong: A Hebrew-English wordlist may insist th
at }{\i\lang1033 nathan}{\lang1033  means "to give", though it actually means "he gave" \endash  this being the simplest and most basic form of this verb, the logical form to be listed in a dictionary. However, a form like }{\b\lang1033 anta}{\lang1033 
- is simply an uninflected A-stem, and Tolkien did refer to cer
tain grammatical circumstances "when the bare stem of the verb is used...as infinitive" (MC:223). The general system also seems to suggest that A-stems with no additions can function as infinitives. (Notice that the infinitives of both primary verbs and A
-stems seem to be similar in form to ending-less aorists.) So I guess we can have sentences like the following (and let me just underline the infinitives to avoid too much fancy coloring):
\par 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\lang1033 I vendi merner }{\b\ul\lang1033 linda}{\lang1033  "the maidens wanted }{\ul\lang1033 to sing}{\lang1033 "
\par }{\b\lang1033 I norsa pol\'eb }{\b\ul\lang1033 orta}{\b\lang1033  i alta ondo}{\lang1033  "the giant can }{\ul\lang1033 lift}{\lang1033  the big rock"}{\ul\lang1033 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\lang1033 Merin }{\b\ul\lang1033 cenda}{\b\lang1033  i parma}{\lang1033  "I want }{\ul\lang1033 to read}{\lang1033  the book"}{\b\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par In some cases, English may prefer a form in -}{\i\lang1033 ing}{\lang1033  to a regular infinitive, for instance after the verbs "start" and "stop". I think it is a fair guess that Quenya would use the normal infinitive in such cases as well:
\par 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\lang1033 I nissi pustaner }{\b\ul\lang1033 linda}{\lang1033  "the women stopped }{\ul\lang1033 singing}{\lang1033 " (or, "...ceased }{\ul\lang1033 to sing}{\lang1033 ")
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par Several infinitives can probably be juxtaposed by means of }{\b\lang1033 ar}{\lang1033  "and":
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab }{\b\lang1033 I neri merir }{\b\ul\lang1033 cenda}{\b\lang1033  ar }{\b\ul\lang1033 tec\'eb}{\b\lang1033  rimb\'eb parmar}{\lang1033  "the men want }{\ul\lang1033 to read}{\lang1033 
 and 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\ul\lang1033 (to) write}{\lang1033  many books"
\par 
\par The discussion above certainly does not cover all there is to say about Quenya infinitives. Some more details are known and will be filled in later in this course, but there are many obscure points. In some very late
 (ca. 1969) notes, Tolkien refers to "the general (aorist) 'infinitive' formed by added -}{\i\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 
" (VT41:17), but since only brief quotes from this material have been published, we cannot be certain what he means. Is there a specific "aorist infinitive"? We have earlier discussed the distinction made between such forms as }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1ta}{
\lang1033  "is eating" (present/continuative tense) and }{\b\lang1033 mat\'eb}{\lang1033  "eats" (aorist). Does Quenya carry these distinctions over into the infinitive, so that one can somehow distinguish "to eat" (aorist infinit
ive) from "to be eating" (continuative infinitive)?
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Moreover, what does Tolkien refer to by "added -}{\i\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 "? Obviously there is an infinitive that is formed by adding -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 
 to the verbal stem (of primary verbs at least). But is this ending a contemporary Quenya suffix, or does it represent a Primitive Elvish form? As mentioned above, the attested infinitive }{\b\lang1033 quet\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "(to) say" may be meant to represent a primitive form }{\i\lang1033 kweti}{\lang1033 , which would indeed be the root }{\i\lang1033 kwet}{\lang1033 - with "added -}{\i\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 ". But if this -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 
 is a contemporary Quenya suffix, there would be an alternative infinitive }{\b\lang1033 queti}{\lang1033  "to say". How it is used, and whether it is interchangeable with the attested form }{\b\lang1033 quet\'eb}{\lang1033 
, we cannot even begin to guess. In the essay }{\i\lang1033 Quendi and Eldar}{\lang1033 , Tolkien did mention a few verb forms that may seem to exemplify an infinitive in -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 , namely }{\b\lang1033 auciri}{\lang1033  and }{
\b\lang1033 h\'f3ciri}{\lang1033 , both meaning "cut off" (in two different senses, see WJ:365-366). But later in the essay, he quoted the same forms with a hyphen attached (}{\b\lang1033 auciri}{\lang1033 -, }{\b\lang1033 h\'f3ciri}{\lang1033 
-), as if these are verbal stems rather than independent infinitive forms (WJ:368). So we cannot be sure of anything, and must await the publication of more material.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par As noted above, the infinitive is traditionally used to }{\i\lang1033 name}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 list}{\lang1033  verbs, or to give their meaning as a general gloss. From n
ow on we will often define verbs in such a way, e.g. glossing a verbal stem like }{\b\lang1033 tul}{\lang1033 - as "to come" and }{\b\lang1033 lanta}{\lang1033 
- as "to fall" (rather than simply "come", "fall"). It must still be understood that the mere stem of primary verb like }{\b\lang1033 tul}{\lang1033 - cannot function as an actual infinitive ("}{\b\lang1033 tul}{\lang1033 ") in a Quenya text (it must be }
{\b\lang1033 tul\'eb}{\lang1033  instead). It is simply customary and convenient to give the meaning of a verb by quoting its gloss in the infinitive. In the Vocabulary listings of Lessons 5 through 8, I had to write "verb" in fro
nt of the gloss of every new verb to make it crystal clear what part of speech the new word belonged to. Sometimes this was actually necessary: If I defined }{\b\lang1033 lanta}{\lang1033 
- simply as "fall", some student would surely manage to overlook the final hyphen of }{\b\lang1033 lanta}{\lang1033 - that is meant to suggest that this is a verbal stem, and conclude that "fall" is here a noun \endash 
 autumn, or something! Finally having introduced the infinitive, I will use this form instead when glossing verbs \endash  like "to fall" in this case.
\par 
\par }{\fs20\lang1033 NOTE 1: In English, infinitives introduced by "to" (or "in order to") are often used to describe an }{\i\fs20\lang1033 intention}{\fs20\lang1033 : "I came }{\fs20\ul\lang1033 to see}{\fs20\lang1033 
 you." In such a context, it seems that Quenya does }{\i\fs20\lang1033 not}{\fs20\lang1033  use the forms discussed so far, but a quite different construction (gerund in dative, to be discussed in a later lesson). 
\par }{\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\cf2\lang1033 THE NEGATIVE VERB
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 This may be a good place to introduce a somewhat peculiar Quenya verb. Earlier we have mentioned the copula }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033 
 "is", which we can now refer to as a tense of the verb "to be". (Don't ask me if }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033  is the prese
nt tense or the aorist, and the other tenses of this verb are unfortunately even more obscure: The verb "to be" is notoriously irregular in the languages of the world, and Tolkien may well have invented some nice irregularities for Quenya as well.)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Anyhow, Quenya also has a unitary verb meaning "}{\i\lang1033 not}{\lang1033  to be"; you can express this meaning without combining some form of }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033 
 with a separate word for "not" (though Quenya does have such a negation as well). This verb is listed in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 , entry }{\i\lang1033 UGU}{\lang1033 /}{\i\lang1033 UMU}{\lang1033 , where it appears as }{\b\lang1033 umin}
{\lang1033  "I am not" (another example of Tolkien's frequent habit of listing primary verbs in the 1st person aorist). The past tense is also listed, somewhat irregular: it is }{\b\lang1033 \'fam\'eb}{\lang1033 , not **}{\b\lang1033 umn\'eb}{\lang1033 
 as it would have to be according to the simplest "regular" pattern. }{\b\lang1033 \'dam\'eb}{\lang1033  as the past tense of a primary verb }{\b\lang1033 um}{\lang1033 - would seem to belong to the same pattern as }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1v\'eb}{\lang1033 
, pa.t. of }{\b\lang1033 lav}{\lang1033 - "to lick" (cf. }{\b\lang1033 undul\'e1v\'eb}{\lang1033  "down-licked" = "covered" in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  in LotR). One must take care not to confuse the past tense form }{\b\lang1033 \'fam\'eb}
{\lang1033  "was not" with the ending-less aorist }{\b\lang1033 um\'eb}{\lang1033  "is not".
\par As the }{\i\lang1033 future}{\lang1033  tense of this verb, we might expect }{\b\lang1033 umuva}{\lang1033 , and this unattested form may well be permissible \endash  but actually a shorter form }{\b\lang1033 \'fava}{\lang1033  occurs in }{\i\lang1033 F
\'edriel's Song}{\lang1033 . Here we have the phrase }{\b\lang1033 \'fava...far\'eba}{\lang1033 , "will not be enough" (}{\b\lang1033 far\'eba}{\lang1033  = adjective "enough, sufficient"). Possibly, this }{\b\lang1033 \'fava}{\lang1033 
 is actually the future tense of another verb: Besides }{\b\lang1033 umin}{\lang1033  "I am not" from the root }{\i\lang1033 UMU}{\lang1033  Tolkien also listed a form }{\b\lang1033 uin}{\lang1033  of the same meaning \endash 
 apparently derived from the root }{\i\lang1033 UGU}{\lang1033 . Perhaps }{\b\lang1033 \'fava}{\lang1033  is strictly the future tense of the latter verb. It could represent a primitive form something like }{\i\lang1033 uguba}{\lang1033 , whereas }{
\b\lang1033 uin}{\lang1033  is to be derived from }{\i\lang1033 ugin}{\lang1033  (or }{\i\lang1033 ugi-ni}{\lang1033  at an even older stage). Between vowels, }{\i\lang1033 g}{\lang1033  was lost in Quenya, so that the two }{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 
's of }{\i\lang1033 uguba}{\lang1033  merged into one long }{\b\lang1033 \'fa}{\lang1033  in }{\b\lang1033 \'fava}{\lang1033 , whereas the }{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  and the }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  of }{\i\lang1033 ugin}{\lang1033 
 merged into a diphthong }{\b\lang1033 ui}{\lang1033  (as in }{\b\lang1033 uin}{\lang1033 ) when the disappearance of }{\i\lang1033 g}{\lang1033  brought the two vowels into direct contact. Whatever development Tolkien may have imagined, we will here use 
}{\b\lang1033 \'fava}{\lang1033  as the future tense of }{\b\lang1033 um}{\lang1033 - "not to be", avoiding the unattested (and perhaps somewhat awkward) form }{\b\lang1033 umuva}{\lang1033 .
\par }{\b\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Like }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1}{\lang1033 , this "negative copula" can presumably be used to connect a subject with a noun or an adjective:
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab }{\b\lang1033 I Nauco um\'eb aran}{\lang1033  "the Dwarf is not a king"
\par }{\b\lang1033 \tab I nissi umir tiuc\'eb}{\lang1033  "the women are not fat"
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\lang1033 I rocco \'fam\'eb mor\'eb}{\lang1033  "the horse was not black"
\par }{\b\lang1033 I neri \'famer sail\'eb}{\lang1033  "the men were not wise"
\par }{\b\lang1033 Elda \'fava \'fam\'eba}{\lang1033  "an Elf will not be evil" 
\par }{\b\lang1033 Nissi \'favar ohtari}{\lang1033  "women will not be warriors" }{\i\fs20\lang1033 (sorry, \'c9owyn!)}{\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par Or, using pronominal endings instead of an independent subject:
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\lang1033 Umin Elda}{\lang1033  "I am not an Elf"
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\lang1033 \'damen saila}{\lang1033  "I was not wise"
\par }{\b\lang1033 \'davaly\'eb ohtar}{\lang1033  "you will not be a warrior"
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 But above I said that this was a good place to introduce the negative verb. This is because it can probably be combined with }{\i\lang1033 infinitives}{\lang1033 
 as well. We lack actual examples, but in the entry }{\i\lang1033 UGU}{\lang1033 /}{\i\lang1033 UMU}{\lang1033  in Etym, Tolkien indicated that }{\b\lang1033 umin}{\lang1033 
 does not always signify "I am not". It can just as well mean "I do not". By combining such a verb with an infinitive, one can probably negate the verbs in question. Home-made examples involving various tenses of the negative verb:
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab }{\b\lang1033 Umin }{\b\ul\lang1033 tur\'eb}{\b\lang1033  macil}{\lang1033  "I do not }{\ul\lang1033 wield}{\lang1033  a sword"
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 M\'e1ma um\'eb }{\b\ul\lang1033 mat\'eb}{\b\lang1033  hr\'e1v\'eb}{\lang1033  "a sheep does not }{\ul\lang1033 eat}{\lang1033  flesh"}{\b\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab }{\b\lang1033 I Nauco \'fam\'eb }{\b\ul\lang1033 tul\'eb}{\b\lang1033  }{\lang1033 "the Dwarf did not }{\ul\lang1033 come}{\lang1033 "
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 I neri \'famer }{\b\ul\lang1033 hir\'eb}{\b\lang1033  i harma}{\lang1033  "the men did not }{\ul\lang1033 find}{\lang1033  the treasure"
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab }{\b\lang1033 I n\'eds \'fava }{\b\ul\lang1033 linda}{\b\lang1033  }{\lang1033 "the woman will not }{\ul\lang1033 sing}{\lang1033 "
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab }{\b\lang1033 I neri \'favar }{\b\ul\lang1033 cen\'eb}{\b\lang1033  i Elda}{\lang1033  "the men will not }{\ul\lang1033 see}{\lang1033  the Elf"
\par 
\par We must assume that following the negative verb, as well as in other contexts, }{\i\lang1033 several}{\lang1033  infinitives may sometimes be combined, like }{\b\lang1033 mer\'eb}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 cen\'eb}{\lang1033 
 in this sentence (the finite verb in }{\cf6\lang1033 red}{\lang1033 , the two infinitives in }{\cf2\lang1033 blue}{\lang1033  and }{\cf5\lang1033 pink}{\lang1033 ):
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab }{\b\lang1033 I Elda }{\b\cf6\lang1033 \'fam\'eb}{\b\lang1033  }{\b\cf2\lang1033 mer\'eb}{\b\lang1033  }{\b\cf5\lang1033 cen\'eb}{\b\lang1033  i Nauco.}{\lang1033  "The Elf }{
\cf6\lang1033 did not}{\lang1033  }{\cf2\lang1033 want}{\lang1033  }{\cf5\lang1033 to see}{\lang1033  the Dwarf."
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par Or again, with the infinitives }{\b\lang1033 mer\'eb}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 cenda}{\lang1033 :
\par 
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 I Nauco }{\b\cf6\lang1033 \'fava}{\b\lang1033  }{\b\cf2\lang1033 mer\'eb}{\b\lang1033  }{\b\cf5\lang1033 cenda}{\b\lang1033  i parma.}{\lang1033  "The Dwarf }{\cf6\lang1033 will not}{\lang1033  }{\cf2\lang1033 want}{\lang1033  }{
\cf5\lang1033 to read}{\lang1033  the book."
\par 
\par Presumably the present/continuous tense of the negative verb, which would have to be }{\b\lang1033 \'fama}{\lang1033 , can be used to deny the existence of an }{\i\lang1033 ongoing}{\lang1033  action:
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\lang1033 I Nauco }{\b\ul\lang1033 \'fama}{\b\lang1033  linda}{\lang1033  "the Dwarf }{\ul\lang1033 is not}{\lang1033  singing" (just now)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par Contrast the aorist: }{\b\lang1033 I Nauco }{\b\ul\lang1033 um\'eb}{\b\lang1033  linda}{\lang1033  "the Dwarf }{\ul\lang1033 does not}{\lang1033 
 sing". The latter would often (but not necessarily) have a wider application, like "the Dwarf is not a singer". Anyhow, we will stick to the aorist in the exercises below.}{\i\lang1033 
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\cf2\lang1033 ACTIVE PARTICIPLES
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 The various parts of speech, such as nouns, verbs, and adjectives, remain relatively distinct categories most of the time. However, some words fuse the properties of several parts of speech. The }{
\i\lang1033 participles}{\lang1033  are words with a basically adjectival function, but they are directly derived from verbs, and in the case of active participles, they are still able to take an object.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 The participles are subdivided into two categories, often called }{\i\lang1033 present participles}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 past participles}{\lang1033 
. These terms are somewhat misleading, for the most important distinction between has nothing to do with tenses. The alternative terms }{\i\lang1033 active participles}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 passive participles}{\lang1033 
 are better, and I will try to use them consistently here.
\par We will save the "past" or passive participle for the next lesson and focus on the "present" or }{\i\lang1033 active participles}{\lang1033  here. In English, this form is derived by means of the ending -}{\i\lang1033 ing}{\lang1033 
. For instance, the verb "follow" has the active participle "following". This verbal adjective describes the state of something or someone that carries out the action of the corresponding verb: The day that }{\i\lang1033 follows}{\lang1033 
 can be described as the }{\i\lang1033 following}{\lang1033  day.
\par If the verb is able to take an object, so is its corresponding participle. A person who }{\i\lang1033 loves}{\lang1033  }{\i\lang1033 Elves}{\lang1033  can be described as a person }{\i\lang1033 loving Elves}{\lang1033 .
\par In English, the form derived from verbs by adding -}{\i\lang1033 ing}{\lang1033  is somewhat ambiguous. It can also function as a noun. The active participle of a verb like "kill" is of course }{\i\lang1033 killing}{\lang1033 
, as it is clearly adjectival in a phrase like "a killing experience", but in a sentence like "the killing must stop", it is equally clear that it is used as a noun. But in the latter sentence, "killing" is a }{\i\lang1033 verbal noun}{\lang1033 
, an abstract noun denoting the action of killing. Here we are only interested in }{\i\lang1033 verbal adjectives}{\lang1033  = participles. In Quenya, the two do not coincide in form.
\par The Quenya ending corresponding to English -}{\i\lang1033 ing}{\lang1033  (when used to form participles) is -}{\b\lang1033 la}{\lang1033 
. There are many examples of active participles in the Markirya poem. For instance, Tolkien in his annotation indicated that "}{\i\lang1033 ilkala}{\lang1033  [is the] participle of }{\i\lang1033 ilka}{\lang1033 
 'gleam (white)' " (MC:223). The participle }{\b\lang1033 ilcala}{\lang1033  (as we would spell it here) thus means "gleaming", and so it is used in the poem, in a phrase translated "in the moon gleaming" (MC:215).
\par It seems that in a Quenya active participle, the stem-vowel is lengthened if possible. In }{\b\lang1033 ilcala}{\lang1033  the }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  cannot become long }{\b\lang1033 \'ed}{\lang1033 
 because there is a consonant cluster following it. However, Tolkien in MC:223 also mentioned a verb }{\b\lang1033 hlapu}{\lang1033 - "to fly or stream in the wind" (one of the rare }{\i\lang1033 U-stems}{\lang1033 , a rat
her obscure category of verbs). Its participle appears as }{\b\lang1033 hl\'e1pula}{\lang1033  on the previous page: }{\b\lang1033 Winga hl\'e1pula}{\lang1033 
, translated "foam blowing" (cf. MC:214). We must assume, then, that the participle of a verb like }{\b\lang1033 lala}{\lang1033 - "to laugh" is }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1lala}{\lang1033  (!) "laughing": The stem-vowe
l is lengthened. If the verbal stem includes a vowel that is long already, it simply stays long in the participle: The participles of }{\b\lang1033 p\'edca}{\lang1033 - "to lessen, dwindle" and }{\b\lang1033 r\'fama}{\lang1033 
- "to shift, move, heave" appear as }{\b\lang1033 p\'edcala}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 r\'famala}{\lang1033  in the }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{\lang1033  poem.
\par In the case of longer verbal stems where the stem-vowel occurs twice, as in }{\b\lang1033 f}{\b\ul\lang1033 a}{\b\lang1033 l}{\b\ul\lang1033 a}{\b\lang1033 sta}{\lang1033 - "to foam" (root evidently }{\i\lang1033 PHALAS}{\lang1033 
), it seems that it is the }{\i\lang1033 second}{\lang1033  occurrence of the stem-vowel that is to be lengthened if possible. In this case it cannot be lengthened, since it is
 followed by a consonant cluster; the participle "foaming" is attested (in Markirya) as }{\b\lang1033 falastala}{\lang1033 . The first occurrence of the stem-vowel }{\i\lang1033 could}{\lang1033  have been lengthened as far as phonology is concerned (**}{
\b\lang1033 f\'e1lastala}{\lang1033 ), but this first vowel evidently does not "count" for the purpose of lengthening. (Presumably it is not lengthened in the present tense, either: }{\b\lang1033 falast\'eba}{\lang1033  "is foaming", hardly ?}{
\b\lang1033 f\'e1last\'eba}{\lang1033 , much less **}{\b\lang1033 fal\'e1st\'eba}{\lang1033 .)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab The primary verbs are a problem. Adding the ending -}{\b\lang1033 la}{\lang1033  to their stems would usually result 
in consonant clusters not permitted in Quenya. For instance, the participle of the verb }{\b\lang1033 tir}{\lang1033 - "to watch" cannot be **}{\b\lang1033 tirla}{\lang1033  (let alone **}{\b\lang1033 t\'edrla}{\lang1033 
), a quite impossible Quenya word. It has been assumed that in such cases, one may start by constructing the "continuative stem" (similar to the present tense) by lengthening the stem-vowel and adding -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 , e.g. }{\b\lang1033 t\'ed
ra}{\lang1033  "is watching", and then derive the participle by adding the participial ending -}{\b\lang1033 la}{\lang1033  to }{\i\lang1033 this}{\lang1033  form: }{\b\lang1033 t\'edrala}{\lang1033  "watching". }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{\lang1033  has }{
\b\lang1033 h\'e1cala}{\lang1033  as a participle "yawning"; unfortunately the underlying verb "to yawn" is not attested, but if it is a primary verb }{\b\lang1033 hac}{\lang1033 
-, the attested participial form would confirm such a theory. But of course, the verb underlying the participle }{\b\lang1033 h\'e1cala}{\lang1033  could just as well be an A-stem }{\b\lang1033 haca}{\lang1033 - or }{\b\lang1033 h\'e1ca}{\lang1033 - (cf. 
}{\b\lang1033 hl\'e1pula}{\lang1033  "blowing, streaming" from }{\b\lang1033 hlapu}{\lang1033 - and }{\b\lang1033 p\'edcala}{\lang1033  "dwindling, waning" from }{\b\lang1033 p\'edca}{\lang1033 -).
\par \tab With the publication of }{\i\lang1033 The Peoples of Middle-earth}{\lang1033  in 1996, a form that may seem to be the participle of a primary verb became available: PM:363 refers to the root "}{\i\lang1033 it}{\lang1033  [as in] }{\i\lang1033 itila}{
\lang1033  'twinkling, glinting', and }{\i\lang1033 \'edta}{\lang1033  'a flash', }{\i\lang1033 ita}{\lang1033 - verb 'to sparkle'." But is }{\b\lang1033 itila}{\lang1033  really the participle of a primary verb }{\b\lang1033 it}{\lang1033 
-? Tolkien refers to }{\b\lang1033 it}{\lang1033 - as a "stem" or root (cf. PM:346), not as a Quenya verb. The actual Quenya verb in question is listed as }{\b\lang1033 ita}{\lang1033 
-, a short A-stem meaning "to sparkle". Its participle would presumably be }{\b\lang1033 \'edtala}{\lang1033 , not }{\b\lang1033 itila}{\lang1033 
. If the latter is a participle at all, it is a peculiar one: it shows no lengthening of the stem-vowel (not **}{\b\lang1033 \'edtila}{\lang1033 ), and a connecting vowel -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 - is inserted before the ending -}{\b\lang1033 la}{
\lang1033 . Since the aorist of a verb }{\b\lang1033 it}{\lang1033 - would be }{\b\lang1033 iti}{\lang1033 - (becoming }{\b\lang1033 it\'eb}{\lang1033  only in the absence of any endings), one may wonder if }{\b\lang1033 itila}{\lang1033  is an }{
\i\lang1033 aorist participle}{\lang1033 . This would mean that Quenya is able to carry the distinction of aorist/
present tense over into the participle, so that there are different forms for "doing" (habitually or momentarily) and "doing" (continuously): perhaps something like }{\b\lang1033 carila}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 c\'e1rala}{\lang1033 
, respectively (from the verb }{\b\lang1033 car}{\lang1033 - "to do"). But this is speculative, and I cannot recommend such a system to writers; we must await the publication of more material. It may be that }{\b\lang1033 itila}{\lang1033 
 is simply an old adjectival formation that no longer "counts" as an adjective in Quenya. The ending -}{\b\lang1033 la}{\lang1033  occurs in adjectives as well, e.g. }{\b\lang1033 saila}{\lang1033  "wise"; undoubtedly -}{\b\lang1033 la}{\lang1033 
 is in origin simply an adjectival ending that came to be favoured as the suffix used to derive verbal adjectives = participles.
\par \tab Even so, Quenya participles seem to have established themselves as formations quite distinct from adjectives, for in one respect their behaviour differs: Unlike adjectives, the active participles apparently do }{\i\lang1033 not}{\lang1033 
 agree in number. For instance, }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{\lang1033  has }{\b\lang1033 r\'e1mar sis\'edlala}{\lang1033  for "wings shining" (the second word being the participle of the verb }{\b\lang1033 sis\'edla}{\lang1033 -, a longer variant of the verb 
}{\b\lang1033 sil}{\lang1033 - "shine white"). As we remember, normal adjectives in -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  have plural forms in -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  (representing archaic Quenya -}{\b\lang1033 ai}{\lang1033 ). So if }{\b\lang1033 sis\'ed
lala}{\lang1033  were to be agree in number with the noun it describes, we would have expected **}{\b\lang1033 r\'e1mar sis\'edlal\'eb}{\lang1033 . Perhaps Tolkien did not want participles in -}{\b\lang1033 la}{\lang1033 
 to agree in number precisely because the plural form of the participial ending would have to be -}{\b\lang1033 l\'eb}{\lang1033 : This ending could easily be confused with the prominent }{\i\lang1033 abstract}{\lang1033  ending -}{\b\lang1033 l\'eb}{
\lang1033 , which is added to verbal stems to derive verbal nouns \endash  e.g. }{\b\lang1033 lindal\'eb}{\lang1033  "singing" from }{\b\lang1033 linda}{\lang1033 - "to sing" (as in }{\b\lang1033 Ainulindal\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "Ainu-singing", free rendering "Music of the Ainur"). While }{\b\lang1033 lindala}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 lindal\'eb}{\lang1033  both translate as "singing" in English, the latter is a }{\i\lang1033 noun}{\lang1033  ("a singing"), whereas th
e former is "singing" in the }{\i\lang1033 adjectival}{\lang1033  sense.
\par 
\par English very often employs the active participle to express the meaning of a continuative tense, combining the participle with a copula like "is" or "was", e.g. "the boy is laughing". But regarding present ac
tions at least, Quenya would rather express this meaning by using the genuine present/continuative tense: }{\b\lang1033 I seldo l\'e1l\'eba}{\lang1033 . None can say whether the English-style wording }{\b\lang1033 i seldo n\'e1 l\'e1lala}{\lang1033 
 is a valid Quenya sentence; one suspects that while it would be intelligible, the Eldar (/Tolkien) would not think of it as "good Quenya".
\par \tab While we have no attested example of an active participle taking an object, we must assume that it is possible, e.g. }{\b\lang1033 Nauco t\'edrala Elda}{\lang1033 , "a Dwarf watching an Elf".
\par 
\par }{\i\cf2\lang1033 Summary of Lesson Nine:}{\lang1033  The infinitive is a form of the verb that is not inflected for tense and is therefore unable to function as the predicate of a sentence (as a }{\i\lang1033 finite}{\lang1033 
 verb can); an infinitive may be combined with other verbs to form longer verbal phrases. While there are some obscurities, the (or one) Quenya infinitive is apparently identical to the verbal stem itself, except that primary verbs receive the ending -}{
\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  \endash  e.g. }{\b\lang1033 quet}{\lang1033 - "to speak" in the sentence }{\b\lang1033 polin quet\'eb}{\lang1033  "I can speak". This infinitive would seem to be the one 
used when infinite and finite verbs are combined (as in the example just quoted, where the infinitive }{\b\lang1033 quet\'eb}{\lang1033  is combined with a finite form of the verb }{\b\lang1033 pol}{\lang1033 - "can"). \endash  The }{\i\lang1033 
negative verb}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 um}{\lang1033 - (past tense }{\b\lang1033 \'fam\'eb}{\lang1033 , future }{\b\lang1033 \'fava}{\lang1033 ) can apparently function both as a negat
ive copula ("not be") and as a verb that may be combined with the infinitive of other verbs to express "not do..." something, e.g. }{\b\lang1033 umin quet\'eb}{\lang1033  "I do not speak".  \endash  The }{\i\lang1033 active participle}{\lang1033 
, a verbal adjective describing the state of the one carrying out the action denoted by the corresponding verb, is derived by adding -}{\b\lang1033 la}{\lang1033 
 to the corresponding verbal stem. The stem-vowel is lengthened if there is no consonant cluster following it. It is somewhat unclear how the ending -}{\b\lang1033 la}{\lang1033  is to be added to the stems of primary 
verbs, but one plausible assumption may be that the ending is suffixed to the "continuous" form (with lengthened stem-vowel and ending -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 , e.g. }{\b\lang1033 t\'edra}{\lang1033  from }{\b\lang1033 tir}{\lang1033 
- "to watch", hence }{\b\lang1033 t\'edrala}{\lang1033  as the participle "watching"). 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\cf2\lang1033 VOCABULARY
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\lang1033 tolto}{\lang1033  "eight"
\par }{\b\lang1033 pol}{\lang1033 - "to be (physically) able to", normally translated "can" }{\fs20\lang1033 (where this refers to some physical ability \endash  }{\i\fs20\lang1033 not}{\fs20\lang1033 
 "can" in the sense "know how to", referring to intellectual skill, or "can" in the sense "may" = "is permitted to", referring to freedom from prohibitions. For the two latter meanings, Quenya uses distinct words.) }{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 um}{\lang1033 - negative verb "not to do" or "not to be", past tense }{\b\lang1033 \'fam\'eb}{\lang1033 , future tense }{\b\lang1033 \'fava}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 mer}{\lang1033 - "to wish, want"
\par }{\b\lang1033 hlar}{\lang1033 - "to hear"}{\fs20\lang1033  (related to Sindarin }{\i\fs20\lang1033 lhaw}{\fs20\lang1033  as in }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Amon Lhaw}{\fs20\lang1033 , the Hill of Hearing mentioned in LotR)}{\b\lang1033 
\par verya}{\lang1033 - "to dare" }{\fs20\lang1033 (from the same root as the Sindarin name }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Beren}{\fs20\lang1033 , meaning bold or daring one)}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 lelya}{\lang1033 - "to go, proceed, travel", past tense }{\b\lang1033 lend\'eb}{\lang1033 , perfect [}{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033 ]}{\b\lang1033 lendi\'eb}{\lang1033  }{\fs20\lang1033 (more about this "irregular" verb in the next lesson)}{
\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 pusta}{\lang1033 - "to stop"
\par }{\b\lang1033 ruhta}{\lang1033 - "to terrify, to scare" }{\fs20\lang1033 (ultimately related to }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Urco}{\fs20\lang1033  or }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Orco}{\fs20\lang1033 , the Quenya words for "bogey, Orc")}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 coa}{\lang1033  "house" }{\fs20\lang1033 (building only, not "house" = "family")}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 mir}{\lang1033  preposition "into"
\par }{\b\lang1033 ter}{\lang1033  preposition "through" }{\fs20\lang1033 (a longer variant }{\b\fs20\lang1033 ter\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  also exists, but I have used }{\b\fs20\lang1033 ter}{\fs20\lang1033  in the exercises below)}{\i\lang1033 
\par }{\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\cf2\lang1033 EXERCISES
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par Translate into English:
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\i\lang1033 A}{\lang1033 . }{\b\lang1033 S\'edlala Isil ort\'eba or Ambar.}{\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\lang1033 B.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 I c\'e1pala Nauco lantan\'eb ter i talan.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 C.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Polin hlar\'eb lindala vend\'eb.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 D.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Min\'eb n\'e9r t\'farala min\'eb macil \'fava ruhta i tolto taur\'eb ohtari.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 E.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 M\'f3l m\'e1pala taura n\'e9r um\'eb saila. 
\par }{\i\lang1033 F. }{\b\lang1033 I tolto r\'e1vi caitala nu i aldar ortaner, an i r\'e1vi merner mat\'eb i neri.
\par }{\i\lang1033 G.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 R\'e1 um\'eb pol\'eb pusta mat\'eb hr\'e1v\'eb}{\lang1033 .
\par }{\i\lang1033 H.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 I ruhtala ohtar pustan\'eb tir\'eb i li\'eb, an i ohtar \'fam\'eb saila.}{\lang1033 
\par 
\par Translate into Quenya:
\par 
\par }{\i\lang1033 I.}{\lang1033  The man pursuing the Dwarf is a warrior.
\par }{\i\lang1033 J. }{\lang1033 The king wanted to go.
\par }{\i\lang1033 K.}{\lang1033  The maiden did not dare to see the queen.
\par }{\i\lang1033 L}{\lang1033 . The laughing women went into the house.
\par }{\i\lang1033 M}{\lang1033 . The eight traveling Dwarves can find many treasures.
\par }{\i\lang1033 N}{\lang1033 . You did not praise the Elf, you do not praise the Man [}{\b\lang1033 Atan}{\lang1033 ], and you will not praise the Dwarf.
\par }{\i\lang1033 O.}{\lang1033  I want to travel through the world and free all peoples.
\par }{\i\lang1033 P.}{\lang1033  A daring man went through the gate and into the mountain.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\fs36\cf6\lang1033 LESSON TEN}{\b\fs32\lang1033  
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\fs32\lang1033 Adverbs. The pronominal endings -}{\b\i\fs32\lang1033 nt\'eb}{\b\fs32\lang1033  and -}{\b\i\fs32\lang1033 t}{\b\fs32\lang1033 
. Infinitives with object pronouns. The past tense of intransitive verbs in -}{\b\i\fs32\lang1033 ya}{\b\fs32\lang1033 . Passive participles.
\par }{\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\cf2\lang1033 ADVERBS}{\cf2\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
Adverbs form a part of speech that is used to provide "extra information" in a sentence. A typical sentence provides information about who does what (to whom), involving a subject, a predicate and if necessary an object. But you may also want to s
lip in information about }{\i\lang1033 when}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 where}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 in what manner}{\lang1033  the verbal action occurs. This is where adverbs enter the linguistic stage.
\par \tab In many cases, adverbs are to verbs what adjectives are to nouns. Like an adjective may describe a noun, an adverb may describe the }{\i\lang1033 nature of the verbal action}{\lang1033 
 of the sentence. In a sentence like "they left swiftly", the last word is an adverb describing }{\i\lang1033 how}{\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 in what manner}{\lang1033 
 "they left". If we say "she is singing now", the word "now" is an adverb answering the question of }{\i\lang1033 when}{\lang1033  the verbal action is taking place. And if we say "they did it here", the word "here" is an adverb telling us }{\i\lang1033 
where}{\lang1033  the verbal action took place.
\par \tab Some adverbs may be called "basic", since they are not derived from another part of speech. Just consider such an adverb of time as English "now" and its Quenya equivalent }{\b\lang1033 s\'ed}{\lang1033 
; neither can be further analyzed. But very many English adverbs are not "basic" in this way. They are transparently derived from adjectives, as in one of the examples we just used: The adver
b "swiftly" is obviously based on the adjective "swift". The Great English Adverb-Former is the ending -}{\i\lang1033 ly}{\lang1033 
, which can in principle be added to any adjective, turning it into an adverb (producing such pairs as deep/deeply, final/finally, great/greatly, high
/highly, swift/swiftly and countless others...but preferably not "good/goodly", since the place of "goodly" is already occupied by the basic adverb }{\i\lang1033 well}{\lang1033 
!) Since we have only a handful of words that Tolkien explicitly identified as adverbs, but plenty of adjectives, it would be nice if we could pin down a Quenya adverb-former like the English ending -}{\i\lang1033 ly}{\lang1033 
. Then we could derive our own Quenya adverbs.
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 We may have such a Quenya ending. It occurs in LotR, as part of the }{\i\lang1033 Cormallen Praise}{\lang1033  (volume 3, Book Six, chapt
er IV: "The Field of Cormallen"). As part of the praise received by the Ringbearers we have the two words }{\b\lang1033 andav\'eb laituvalmet}{\lang1033 , translated "long we will praise them" in Letters:308. Here we have the adverb }{\b\lang1033 andav
\'eb}{\lang1033 , "long" (here meaning "for a long time"). We know that the Quenya }{\i\lang1033 adjective}{\lang1033  "long" is }{\b\lang1033 anda}{\lang1033  (cf. Sindarin }{\i\lang1033 and}{\lang1033  as in }{\i\lang1033 And}{\lang1033 +}{\i\lang1033 
duin}{\lang1033  = }{\i\lang1033 Anduin}{\lang1033 , "Long River"). It would seem, then, that this adjective has been turned into an adverb by supplying the ending -}{\b\lang1033 v\'eb}{\lang1033  (probably related to the Quenya preposition }{\b\lang1033 
ve}{\lang1033  "as, like"). In the case of }{\b\lang1033 anda}{\lang1033 /}{\b\lang1033 andav\'eb}{\lang1033 , the English translation is "long" in either case, but normally the ending -}{\b\lang1033 v\'eb}{\lang1033 
 would correspond to English "-ly". So if }{\b\lang1033 alta}{\lang1033  is "great", can we use }{\b\lang1033 altav\'eb}{\lang1033  for "greatly"? Since }{\b\lang1033 tulca}{\lang1033  is a word for "firm", would "firmly" be }{\b\lang1033 tulcav\'eb}{
\lang1033 ? Knowing that }{\b\lang1033 saila}{\lang1033  means "wise", can we assume that }{\b\lang1033 sailav\'eb}{\lang1033 
 an acceptable word for "wisely"? By and large, I think such formations are plausible, though the potential application of the ending -}{\b\lang1033 v\'eb}{\lang1033  may not be literally limitless. The Quenya adjective "good" is }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1ra}{
\lang1033 ; one wonders if }{\b\lang1033 m\'e1rav\'eb}{\lang1033  for "well" would sound just as weird as "goodly" in English! (A basic adverb }{\b\lang1033 vand\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "well" occurs in Tolkien's earliest "Qenya" wordlist [QL:99]; whether this was still a valid word in LotR-style Quenya some forty years later, none can say.)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Like }{\b\lang1033 anda}{\lang1033  "long", the vast majority of Quenya adjectives end in -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 . The less frequent adjectives in -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033 
 in practically all cases descend from Primitive Elvish forms in -}{\i\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 , which vowel would be preserved unchanged before an ending or in compounds: Compare }{\b\lang1033 mor}{\b\ul\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033 
 "dark, black" with the compound }{\b\lang1033 Mor}{\b\ul\lang1033 i}{\b\lang1033 quendi}{\lang1033  "Dark Elves". We must assume that the original quality of the vowel would also be preferred before the adverbial ending -}{\b\lang1033 v\'eb}{\lang1033  
\endash  so if we try to derive an adverb "darkly" from }{\b\lang1033 mor\'eb}{\lang1033 , it should probably be }{\b\lang1033 moriv\'eb}{\lang1033  rather than }{\b\lang1033 morev\'eb}{\lang1033 . Actually, very few of the adjectives in -}{\b\lang1033 
\'eb}{\lang1033  are likely to have any corresponding adverbs; they mostly denote colours. Perhaps we can have }{\b\lang1033 muss\'eb}{\lang1033 /}{\b\lang1033 mussiv\'eb}{\lang1033  "soft/softly", }{\b\lang1033 nind\'eb}{\lang1033 /}{\b\lang1033 nindiv
\'eb}{\lang1033  "thin/thinly" and }{\b\lang1033 ring\'eb}{\lang1033 /}{\b\lang1033 ringiv\'eb}{\lang1033  "cold/coldly" (but in a later source, the word for "cold" appears as }{\b\lang1033 ringa}{\lang1033  rather than }{\b\lang1033 ring\'eb}{\lang1033 
, and then the adverb would simply be }{\b\lang1033 ringav\'eb}{\lang1033 ).
\par How the ending -}{\b\lang1033 v\'eb}{\lang1033  would be added to the few adjectives in -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  is quite unclear. The adjective }{\b\lang1033 melin}{\lang1033  "dear" (not to 
be confused with the similar-sounding 1st person aorist "I love") could have a corresponding adjective }{\b\lang1033 melinv\'eb}{\lang1033  "dearly", for while }{\b\lang1033 nv}{\lang1033 
 does not occur in unitary words, it is a possible Quenya combination (cf. Aragorn's title }{\b\lang1033 Envinyatar}{\lang1033  "Renewer", where }{\b\lang1033 en}{\lang1033 - = "re-"). On the other hand, if the ending -}{\b\lang1033 v\'eb}{\lang1033 
 is related to the preposition }{\b\lang1033 ve}{\lang1033  "as, like", both probably descend from }{\i\lang1033 be}{\lang1033  in Primitive Elvish. We could then argue that the original }{\i\lang1033 melin-be}{\lang1033  would rather come out as }{
\b\lang1033 melimb\'eb}{\lang1033  in Quenya. On the yet other hand (if we can postulate even more hands), adjectives in -}{\b\lang1033 in}{\lang1033  seem to be shortened from longer forms in -}{\b\lang1033 ina}{\lang1033 
, and then one could argue that this }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  would be preserved before an ending. Thus, "dearly" could be }{\b\lang1033 melinav\'eb}{\lang1033 . (I'd say, forget about }{\b\lang1033 melin}{\lang1033  and start from }{\b\lang1033 melda}
{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 moina}{\lang1033  instead, which adjectives also mean "dear". Then we can simply have }{\b\lang1033 meldav\'eb}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 moinav\'eb}{\lang1033 !)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par In English at least, an adverb does not necessarily describe a verbal action. It can also be used to modify the meaning of an adjective (or even anoth
er adverb). This is a kind of meta-description, one descriptive word describing another. Whether Quenya adverbs (or specifically the ones in -}{\b\lang1033 v\'eb}{\lang1033 ) can be used in such a way, nobody knows. For instance: Knowing that }{
\b\lang1033 valaina}{\lang1033  is the Quenya adjective "divine", can we feel free to use }{\b\lang1033 valainav\'eb vanya}{\lang1033  for "divinely beautiful"? Tolkien provided }{\b\lang1033 aqua}{\lang1033 
 as the adverb "fully, completely, altogether, wholly" (WJ:392 \endash  this is a "basic" adverb }{\i\lang1033 not}{\lang1033  derived from an adjective, unlike the English glosses in -}{\i\lang1033 ly}{\lang1033  that are deriv
ed from the adjectives "full, complete, whole"). It does seem very likely that this }{\b\lang1033 aqua}{\lang1033  can modify an adjective, e.g. }{\b\lang1033 aqua mor\'eb}{\lang1033  "completely dark". If this is not so, Tolkien ought to have told us...!

\par 
\par It may be noted that in some early sources, Tolkien uses adverbs in -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033  rather than -}{\b\lang1033 v\'eb}{\lang1033 . The one attestation of the latter is, as I have pointed out, }{\b\lang1033 andav\'eb}{\lang1033 
 vs. the adjective }{\b\lang1033 anda}{\lang1033  "long". However, there exists an early "Qenya" sentence which translates as "the Elves were lying long asleep at Kovien\'e9ni [later: Cuivi\'e9nen]"; see }{\i\lang1033 Vinyar Tengwar}{\lang1033 
 #27. In this sentence, the adverb "long" appears as }{\b\lang1033 ando}{\lang1033 , not }{\b\lang1033 andav\'eb}{\lang1033 . Further examples of adverbs in -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033  include }{\b\lang1033 ento}{\lang1033  "next" and }{\b\lang1033 rato}
{\lang1033  "soon" (from an "Arctic" sentence quoted in }{\i\lang1033 Father Christmas Letters}{\lang1033  \endash  obviously a form of 
"Qenya", though appearing in a context that has nothing to do with Tolkien's serious literary output). We may even include the adverb }{\b\lang1033 voro}{\lang1033  "ever, continually" from such a relatively late source as the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{
\lang1033  (entry }{\i\lang1033 BOR}{\lang1033 ), though in this word, the final -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033  may be simply the stem-vowel reduplicated and suffixed.
\par \tab The example }{\b\lang1033 ando}{\lang1033  "long" (not to be confused with the noun "gate"), which is obviously derived from the adjective }{\b\lang1033 anda}{\lang1033 , would seem to indicate that the ending -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033 
 can be used to derive adverbs from adjectives. May we then have (say) }{\b\lang1033 tulco}{\lang1033  "firmly" from }{\b\lang1033 tulca}{\lang1033  "firm", as an alternative to }{\b\lang1033 tulcav\'eb}{\lang1033 
? Or are we to understand that Tolkien, by the LotR period, had }{\i\lang1033 dropped}{\lang1033  -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033  as an adverbial ending? If so he introduced -}{\b\lang1033 v\'eb}{\lang1033  as a replacement, not an alternative (changing }{
\b\lang1033 ando}{\lang1033  to }{\b\lang1033 andav\'eb}{\lang1033 ). 
\par \tab We cannot know whether -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033  is still a valid adverbial ending in LotR-style Quenya. But when deriving adverbs from adjectives, I would recommend using the "safe" (or at least safer) ending -}{\b\lang1033 v\'eb}{\lang1033 
 instead. In the exercises below, I have not used the ending -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033 , but only -}{\b\lang1033 v\'eb}{\lang1033 . On the other hand, at this stage I would not tamper with attested adverbs like }{\b\lang1033 ento}{\lang1033 , }{
\b\lang1033 rato}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 voro}{\lang1033  (changing them to ?}{\b\lang1033 entav\'eb}{\lang1033  etc.)
\par 
\par Do adverbs, like adjectives, agree in number? It has been suggested that }{\b\lang1033 andav\'eb}{\lang1033  is actually a }{\i\lang1033 plural}{\lang1033  adverb, agreeing with a plural verb (}{\b\lang1033 andav\'eb laituva}{\b\ul\lang1033 lme}{
\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  "long }{\ul\lang1033 we}{\lang1033  will praise them" \endash  notice the plural subject ending attached to the verb). If so, -}{\b\lang1033 v\'eb}{\lang1033  could be the plural form of a }{\i\lang1033 singular}{\lang1033 
 adverbial ending -}{\b\lang1033 va}{\lang1033 , completely unattested. According to this system, we would have such variation as }{\b\lang1033 i n\'e9r lend\'eb andava}{\lang1033 
 "the man traveled long" (singular adverb corresponding to a singular verb) vs. }{\b\lang1033 i neri lender andav\'eb}{\lang1033  "the men traveled long" (plural adverb to go with a plural verb). But this is 100
 % hypothetical. While nothing can be ruled out at this stage, I tend to believe that this there is no such variation. More likely, the adverbial ending -}{\b\lang1033 v\'eb}{\lang1033  is invariable in form, related to the preposition }{\b\lang1033 ve}{
\lang1033  "as, like" as suggested above.
\par 
\par In closing, I should mention that some Quenya adverbs are derived from other parts of speech than adjectives. In }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  we have }{\b\lang1033 oial\'eb}{\lang1033 
 as the adverb "for ever" (or "everlastingly", as the interlinear translation in RGEO:67 goes). But the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 , entry }{\i\lang1033 OY}{\lang1033 , indicates that }{\b\lang1033 oial\'eb}{\lang1033 
 is properly or in its origin a }{\i\lang1033 noun}{\lang1033  meaning "everlasting age". Apparently this noun is used as an adverb in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 .
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Phrases involving prepositions very often have an adverbial function to begin with, and sometimes unitary adverbs may evolve from them: In }{\i\lang1033 Cirion's Oath}{\lang1033  we have }{
\b\lang1033 tennoio}{\lang1033  as another Quenya word meaning "for ever", but in UT:317, Tolkien explains that this form is simply a contraction of two originally distinct words: the preposition }{\b\lang1033 tenna}{\lang1033  "up to, as far as" + }{
\b\lang1033 oio}{\lang1033  "an endless period".
\par Finally we have what I have already called "basic adverbs", not derived from any other part of speech. }{\b\lang1033 Aqua}{\lang1033  "completely" and }{\b\lang1033 s\'ed}{\lang1033 
 "now" mentioned above are just two examples; we may also include words like }{\b\lang1033 amba}{\lang1033  "up(wards)", }{\b\lang1033 h\'e1ya}{\lang1033  "far off" (read perhaps }{\b\lang1033 haiya}{\lang1033  as the Third Age form), }{\b\lang1033 oi}{
\lang1033  "ever", and others.
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\cf2\lang1033 THE PRONOMINAL ENDINGS -}{\b\i\cf2\lang1033 NT\'cb}{\b\cf2\lang1033  AND -}{\b\i\cf2\lang1033 T}{\b\cf2\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 In Lesson Eight, we introduced three pronominal endings: -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  or longer -}{\b\lang1033 ny\'eb}{\lang1033  for "I", -}{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033  or longer -}{\b\lang1033 ly\'eb}{
\lang1033  for "you", and -}{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  for "it". But obviously there are more pronouns, and we will now attempt to identify the pronominal endings of the Third Person Plural: as subject "they", as object "them".
\par \tab }{\i\lang1033 Cirion's Oath}{\lang1033  in UT:305 includes the word }{\b\lang1033 tiruvantes}{\lang1033 , in UT:317 translated "they will guard it". The verb }{\b\lang1033 tir}{\lang1033 - "watch, guard", the future-tense ending -}{\b\lang1033 uva}{
\lang1033  "shall, will" and the pronominal ending -}{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  "it" ought to be familiar to the student by now. We are left with -}{\b\lang1033 nte}{\lang1033 - as the element translated "they". UT:317 explicitly confirms that -}{
\b\lang1033 nt\'eb}{\lang1033  is the "inflection of 3[rd person] plural wher
e no subject is previously mentioned". Like most brief linguistic notes of Tolkien's, this one does require some exegesis. I shall here assume that Tolkien's intention is this: If a sentence has a plural subject that has been "previously mentioned", occur
ring before the verb, the verb would only receive the normal plural ending -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  (e.g. }{\b\lang1033 i neri mati}{\b\ul\lang1033 r}{\b\lang1033  apsa}{\lang1033  "the men eat meat"). But if there is }{\i\lang1033 no}{\lang1033 
 subject "previously mentioned", the ending -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  is replaced by -}{\b\lang1033 nt\'eb}{\lang1033 , meaning "they": }{\b\lang1033 Mati}{\b\ul\lang1033 nt\'eb}{\b\lang1033  apsa}{\lang1033 , "}{\ul\lang1033 they}{\lang1033 
 eat meat". Apparently, this ending would still be used if the subject is identified }{\i\lang1033 later}{\lang1033  in the sentence; perhaps we can have such a sentence as }{\b\lang1033 matint\'eb apsa i neri}{\lang1033  "they eat meat(,) the men (do)". 
}{\i\lang1033 Cirion's Oath}{\lang1033  also identifies the subject later in the sentence (}{\b\lang1033 nai tiruva}{\b\ul\lang1033 nte}{\b\lang1033 s }{\b\i\lang1033 i h\'e1rar mahalmassen mi N\'famen}{\b\lang1033  }{\lang1033 "be it that }{\ul\lang1033 
they}{\lang1033  will guard it, }{\i\lang1033 the ones who sit on thrones in the west}{\lang1033 ...")
\par \tab }{\i\lang1033 Cirion's Oath}{\lang1033  occurs in post-LotR material, so the information provided in UT:305, 317 was certainly intended to be LotR-compatible. Howev
er, a quite different pronominal ending for "they" occurs in Tolkien's early material. In LT1:114, we find the "Qenya" form }{\b\lang1033 tulielto}{\lang1033  "they have come", including the ending -}{\b\lang1033 lto}{\lang1033 
 for "they". This ending was current as late as when Tolkien wrote }{\i\lang1033 F\'edriel's Song}{\lang1033 , which includes the forms }{\b\lang1033 c\'e1rielto}{\lang1033  "they made" and }{\b\lang1033 antalto}{\lang1033 
 "they gave" (LR:72). Whether it is also valid in LotR-style Quenya is another matter. The ending -}{\b\lang1033 lto}{\lang1033  looks somewhat strange compared to the other known pronominal endings. Of the pronominal endin
gs attested in LotR or during the post-LotR period, }{\i\lang1033 all}{\lang1033  the subject endings that constitute a separate syllable end in the vowel -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  (six endings in all, if we include -}{\b\lang1033 nt\'eb}{\lang1033 
 discussed above). A suffix -}{\b\lang1033 lto}{\lang1033  ending in -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033  doesn't seem to fit in very well (so some would alter -}{\b\lang1033 lto}{\lang1033  to -}{\b\lang1033 lt\'eb}{\lang1033 
 in LotR-style Quenya, though there is no evidence for such an ending). I tend to assume that Tolkien eventually scrapped this ending completely, replacing it with -}{\b\lang1033 nt\'eb}{\lang1033 .
\par \tab The opinion has been voiced that }{\b\lang1033 -lto}{\lang1033  is valid all the same. Some would interpret Tolkien's note about -}{\b\lang1033 nt\'eb}{\lang1033  being used "where no subject is previously mentioned" in an }{\i\lang1033 absolute}{
\lang1033  sense: It wouldn't be enough that the subject has not been "previously mentioned" in the }{\i\lang1033 same sentence}{\lang1033 , as I assumed above. Of course, wh
en the word "they" is used in English, it usually refers back to some group mentioned earlier in the text or conversation. According to the strict interpretation of Tolkien's note about -}{\b\lang1033 nt\'eb}{\lang1033 
, this pronominal ending cannot be used for any "they" that refers back to some group mentioned earlier, even if it was in a quite different sentence. The ending -}{\b\lang1033 nt\'eb}{\lang1033  would only point }{\i\lang1033 forward}{\lang1033 
, to some group that is to be identified }{\i\lang1033 later}{\lang1033  in the text or sentence (as is the case in Cirion's Oath). "They" referring back to 
some other group (already mentioned in another sentence) would require a quite different ending, perhaps the -}{\b\lang1033 lto}{\lang1033  attested in earlier sources.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 I can't claim that this isn't a }{\i\lang1033 possible}{\lang1033  interpretation of Tolkien's words or the available examples. However, I still have a bad feeling about using the ending -}{
\b\lang1033 lto}{\lang1033  in LotR-style Quenya. In the exercises I have made for this course, I have ignored -}{\b\lang1033 lto}{\lang1033 , assuming that -}{\b\lang1033 nt\'eb}{\lang1033 
 can be used as a pronominal ending signifying "they" in a general sense. When Tolkien speaks of -}{\b\lang1033 nt\'eb}{\lang1033  being used only for a subject that has not been "previously mentioned", I assume that he means "not previously mentioned }{
\i\lang1033 in the same sentence}{\lang1033 " (for if a plural subject had already occurred, the verb would receive only the normal plural marker -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 ). Hence we can \endash  presumably \endash  have forms like these, with -}{
\b\lang1033 nt\'eb}{\lang1033  attached to the various tenses of }{\b\lang1033 pusta}{\lang1033 - "to stop":
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab Aorist }{\b\lang1033 pusta}{\b\ul\lang1033 nt\'eb}{\lang1033  "}{\ul\lang1033 they}{\lang1033  stop"
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab Present }{\b\lang1033 pust\'eba}{\b\ul\lang1033 nt\'eb}{\lang1033  "}{\ul\lang1033 they}{\lang1033  are stopping"
\par \tab Past }{\b\lang1033 pustane}{\b\ul\lang1033 nt\'eb}{\lang1033  "}{\ul\lang1033 they}{\lang1033  stopped"
\par \tab Future }{\b\lang1033 pustuva}{\b\ul\lang1033 nt\'eb}{\lang1033  "they will stop"
\par \tab Perfect }{\b\lang1033 upustie}{\b\ul\lang1033 nt\'eb}{\lang1033  "}{\ul\lang1033 they}{\lang1033  have stopped"
\par 
\par As indicated by the attested example }{\b\lang1033 tiruva}{\b\cf6\lang1033 nte}{\b\cf2\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  = "}{\cf6\lang1033 they}{\lang1033  will guard }{\cf2\lang1033 it}{\lang1033 ", a second pronominal ending can be attached following -}{
\b\lang1033 nt\'eb}{\lang1033  (-}{\b\lang1033 nte}{\lang1033 -), denoting the }{\i\lang1033 object}{\lang1033  of the sentence. This brings us over to another question: If -}{\b\lang1033 nt\'eb}{\lang1033 
 is the subject ending "they", what is the corresponding object ending "them"?
\par \tab Discussing adverbs above, we have already quoted the sentence }{\b\lang1033 andav\'eb laituvalmet}{\lang1033  "long we will praise them" from LotR. Knowing that }{\b\lang1033 laituvalmet}{\lang1033  means "we will praise them", we
 can easily isolate the final -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 
 as the element translated "them". (The cunning student will also be able to isolate the pronominal ending signifying "we", but we will save that one for later: Actually Quenya has several endings for "we", with different shades of meaning.)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 As usual, things are not quite crystal clear. The ones being praised here are Frodo and Sam, }{\i\lang1033 two}{\lang1033  persons. Some have therefore assumed that this -}{\b\lang1033 t}{
\lang1033  is a }{\i\lang1033 dual}{\lang1033  "them", even suggesting that }{\b\lang1033 laituvalme}{\b\ul\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  may be rendered "we will praise }{\ul\lang1033 both}{\lang1033  [of
 them]". Those adhering to this theory have been encouraged by the fact that there is also a dual ending -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  (as in }{\b\lang1033 ciryat}{\lang1033 
 "2 ships"; look up Lesson Three again). Nothing can be definitely ruled out at this time, but the ending -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  "them" would seem to match -}{\b\lang1033 nt\'eb}{\lang1033  "they" quite well. I don't think -}{\b\lang1033 t}{
\lang1033  is exclusively dual, but in any case, this is }{\i\lang1033 one}{\lang1033  ending that can be translated "them". Hence, forms like the following must be possible:
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab }{\b\lang1033 Tirne}{\b\cf6\lang1033 nye}{\b\cf2\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  = "}{\cf6\lang1033 I}{\lang1033  watched }{\cf2\lang1033 them}{\lang1033 "
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab }{\b\lang1033 Meli}{\b\cf6\lang1033 lye}{\b\cf2\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  = "}{\cf6\lang1033 you}{\lang1033  love }{\cf2\lang1033 them}{\lang1033 "
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 Hiruva}{\b\cf6\lang1033 nye}{\b\cf2\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  = "}{\cf6\lang1033 I}{\lang1033  will find }{\cf2\lang1033 them}{\lang1033 "
\par \tab 
\par and even:
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab }{\b\lang1033 Pustane}{\b\cf6\lang1033 nte}{\b\cf2\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  = "}{\cf6\lang1033 they}{\lang1033  stopped }{\cf2\lang1033 them}{\lang1033 "
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par Likely, this would refer to two different groups. "They stopped }{\i\lang1033 themselves}{\lang1033 " is probably expressed in another way (unfortunately we don't really know how).
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\cf2\lang1033 INFINITIVES WITH OBJECT PRONOUNS}{\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 So far, we have identified two pronominal endings that can be used as the }{\i\lang1033 object}{\lang1033  of the sentence, -}{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  for "it" and -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 
 for "they". As is evident from attested examples (}{\b\lang1033 tiruvante}{\b\ul\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  "they will guard }{\ul\lang1033 it}{\lang1033 ", }{\b\lang1033 laituvalme}{\b\ul\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  "we will praise }{\ul\lang1033 them}{
\lang1033 "), these object endings may be attached to a finite verb following another pronominal ending denoting the subject. But what about a longer verbal phrase involving an }{\i\lang1033 infinitive}{\lang1033 ?
\par \tab Let us start with a sentence like }{\b\lang1033 i m\'f3l veryan\'eb cen\'eb i aran ar i t\'e1ri}{\lang1033 , "the thrall dared to see the king and the queen". Here we have a finite verb }{\b\lang1033 veryan\'eb}{\lang1033  "dared" + an infinitive }{
\b\lang1033 cen\'eb}{\lang1033  "to see". Now we want to get rid of the whole phrase "the king and the queen", replacing it with the object pronoun "them", hence "the thrall dared to see }{\i\lang1033 them}{\lang1033 ". (Notice tha
t I deliberately construct an example that will be compatible with the theory of -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  "them" being }{\i\lang1033 dual}{\lang1033 
 only, even though I don't believe this to be the case...unnecessary risks are just that, unnecessary!) Well, where do we put the ending -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 ? Quite obviously, it must be attached to the infinitive }{\b\lang1033 cen\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "to see". }{\b\lang1033 Cenet}{\lang1033 , then? Or, since the infinitive }{\b\lang1033 cen\'eb}{\lang1033  seems to represent Primitive Elvish }{\i\lang1033 keni}{\lang1033  and primitive -}{\i\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  changes to -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{
\lang1033  only when final, one might think that }{\b\lang1033 cenit}{\lang1033  is a better choice. So "the thrall dared }{\cf6\lang1033 to see}{\lang1033  }{\cf2\lang1033 them}{\lang1033 " = }{\b\lang1033 i m\'f3l veryan\'eb }{\b\cf6\lang1033 ceni}{
\b\cf2\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , right?
\par \tab Wrong! In }{\i\lang1033 Vinyar Tengwar}{\lang1033  #41, July 2000, it was revealed that the infinitive of primary verbs is formed with the ending -}{\b\lang1033 ita}{\lang1033  if any pronominal endings are to be added (actually the suffix is only -}
{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033 -, which added to an infinitive like }{\b\lang1033 cen\'eb}{\lang1033  = }{\b\lang1033 ceni}{\lang1033 - produces }{\b\lang1033 cenita}{\lang1033 
-). Tolkien in some of his late (ca. 1969) notes refers to "the general (aorist) 'infinitive' formed by adding -}{\i\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  (not as such capable of any further suffixion; with pronominal affixes it was the stem of 
the aorist tense); the particular infinitive with -}{\i\lang1033 ita}{\lang1033  differing in use from the preceding mainly in being able to receive pronominal object affixes" (VT41:17). He went on to quote the example }{\b\lang1033 caritas}{\lang1033 
, "doing it" (or probably just as well "to do it") \endash  an infinitive of the verb }{\b\lang1033 car}{\lang1033 - "do" with the object ending -}{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  "it" attached.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 As I pointed out in the previous lesson, it is unclear whether the reference to an infinitive constructed by "adding -}{\i\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 
" implies that there is a contemporary Quenya infinitive that shows the ending -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 . Tolkien may simply refer to the original form of the infinitive ending, e.g. Primitive Elvish }{\i\lang1033 kwet}{\i\ul\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 
 as the form underlying the contemporary Quenya form }{\b\lang1033 quet}{\b\ul\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  "(to) speak" (attested in the sentence }{\b\lang1033 polin quet\'eb}{\lang1033  "I can speak"). Anyhow, thi
s infinitive was "not as such capable of any further suffixation", apparently to avoid confusion with "the stem of the aorist tense". The infinitive of }{\b\lang1033 car}{\lang1033 - "make, do" would be }{\b\lang1033 car\'eb}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 
cari}{\lang1033 -), but if we tried to add an ending like -}{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  "it" directly to it in order to express "to do it", the resulting form **}{\b\lang1033 caris}{\lang1033 
 would look just like the aorist "it does" or "it makes". The actual form }{\b\lang1033 caritas}{\lang1033  is not ambiguous.
\par In the case of "they make" vs. "to make them", there would be a distinction even without the extra -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033 -, since the subject ending for "they" (-}{\b\lang1033 nt\'eb}{\lang1033 ) differs from the object ending "them" (-}{
\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 ). Even so, Tolkien apparently decided to eliminate any possible confusion between aorist forms with subject endings and infinitives with object endings: The infinitives insert -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033 
- between the infinitive proper and the pronominal suffixes. Therefore, the infinitive "to see" is expanded from }{\b\lang1033 cen\'eb}{\lang1033  to }{\b\lang1033 cenita}{\lang1033 - when it is to receive any object ending. "The thrall dared }{
\cf6\lang1033 to see}{\lang1033  }{\cf2\lang1033 them}{\lang1033 " must actually be }{\b\lang1033 i m\'f3l veryan\'eb }{\b\cf6\lang1033 ceni}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\b\cf2\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , the extra -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033 
- intruding between the infinitive and the object ending.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab It is unclear whether A-stem verbs behave in the same way. }{\i\lang1033 Vinyar Tengwar}{\lang1033 
 #41 published only a very brief quote from Tolkien's 1969 notes (the editor apparently needed the space for more i
mportant things, like an in-depth article about the optimal Bulgarian translation of the Ring Poem). The quote, reproduced above, apparently only deals with the infinitive form of primary verbs \endash  the ones that have aorists in -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{
\lang1033  or with endings -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 -. Some writers have assumed that A-stem verbs functioning as infinitives would similarly add -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033  before any object pronominal endings are suffixed. So with verbs like }{
\b\lang1033 metya}{\lang1033 - "to end, to put an end to" and }{\b\lang1033 mapa}{\lang1033 - "to seize", it would work something like this:
\par }{\b\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\lang1033 \tab Merint\'eb }{\b\cf6\lang1033 metya}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\b\cf2\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  "they want to }{\cf6\lang1033 end}{\lang1033  }{\cf2\lang1033 it}{\lang1033 " 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab }{\b\lang1033 I ohtari \'favar }{\b\cf6\lang1033 mapa}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\b\cf2\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  "the warriors will not }{\cf6\lang1033 seize}{\lang1033  }{\cf2\lang1033 them}{\lang1033 "}{
\b\lang1033 
\par }{\lang1033 \tab \tab }{\b\lang1033 
\par }{\lang1033 Perhaps such sentences are quite OK, perhaps not. Presently there is no way of telling. One may doubt that the ending -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033  would be added to the stem of a verb that ends in -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033  already, like }
{\b\lang1033 orta}{\lang1033 - "to lift up, to raise". Should "I can }{\cf6\lang1033 lift}{\lang1033  }{\cf2\lang1033 it}{\lang1033 " really be }{\b\lang1033 polin }{\b\cf6\lang1033 orta}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\b\cf2\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 
? Generally, Quenya is not very fond of two adjacent similar-sounding syllables, like the two }{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033 's here.
\par \tab Luckily, we can work around this uncertainty. We can simply avoid attaching object pronominal endings to the infinitives of A-stem verbs, since we know at least some }{\i\lang1033 independent}{\lang1033  object pronouns (e.g. }{\b\lang1033 te}{
\lang1033  "them" instead of the ending -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  \endash  so for, say, "you wanted to seize them" we can have }{\b\lang1033 mernely\'eb mapa te}{\lang1033  instead of the uncertain construction ?}{\b\lang1033 mernely\'eb mapatat}{
\lang1033 ). We will discuss the independent pronouns in a later lesson. In the exercises below, the infinitives in -}{\b\lang1033 ita}{\lang1033  + object suffix only involve primary verbs.
\par 
\par It is interesting to notice that Tolkien translated }{\b\lang1033 caritas}{\lang1033  as "doing it" (VT41:17). This may suggest that such infinitives can also function as the }{\i\lang1033 subject}{\lang1033  of a sentence, e.g. }{\b\lang1033 
cenitas farya nin}{\lang1033  "seeing it is enough for me" (}{\b\lang1033 farya}{\lang1033 - verb "to suffice, to be enough"; }{\b\lang1033 nin}{\lang1033  "to/for me").
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\cf2\lang1033 THE PAST TENSE OF INTRANSITIVE VERBS IN -}{\b\i\cf2\lang1033 YA}{\b\cf2\lang1033  
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
In Lesson Six, we set out some rules for "regular" past tense formation, but we also touched on various "irregular" forms (that is, past tense formations that don't readily fall into the most common patterns). Some of the
se may actually form sub-groups that are "regular" enough according to their own special rules.
\par \tab Let me first introduce a couple of terms that will facilitate the following discussion: }{\i\lang1033 transitive}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 intransitive}{\lang1033 . In linguist terminology, a verb is said to
 be transitive if it can have an object. Most verbs readily can, but not all. A verb like "to fall" is not transitive (= }{\i\lang1033 in}{\lang1033 
transitive). The subject itself may "fall", but the subject cannot "fall" something else; there can be no object. A typical intransitive verb only describes an action which the subject itself performs, not an action that is, or can be, done }{\i\lang1033 
to}{\lang1033  someone or something. (I say "typical", for Quenya actually has some verbs that cannot even have a subject, the so-called }{\i\lang1033 impersonal}{\lang1033  verbs \endash  to be discussed in Lesson Eighteen.)
\par \tab Some verbs form pairs where one verb is transitive, the other intransitive. The subject may }{\i\lang1033 raise}{\lang1033  an object (transitively), but the subject by itself can only }{\i\lang1033 rise}{\lang1033  (intransitively) \endash 
 not involving any object at all. Other examples of such pairs include transitive "to fell" vs. intransitive "to fall", or transitive "to lay" vs. intransitive "to lie". But in many cases, English uses the }{\i\lang1033 same}{\lang1033 
 verb form both intransitively and transitively, e.g. "to sink". A subject may }{\i\lang1033 sink}{\lang1033  an
 object (e.g. "the torpedo sank the ship", transitive verb with both subject and object), or the subject just "sinks" all by itself, so to speak (e.g. "the ship sank", intransitive verb with subject only \endash 
 obviously "sank" is used with two quite different meanings here). Such ambiguity may also occur in Quenya; for instance, }{\b\lang1033 orta}{\lang1033 
- covers both "to raise" and "to rise", and the context must be taken into account to determine which meaning is relevant. (To be more concrete: check if the sentence includes an object or not! E.g. }{\b\lang1033 i aran }{\b\i\lang1033 orta}{\lang1033 
 = "the king }{\i\lang1033 rises}{\lang1033 ", but }{\b\lang1033 i aran }{\b\i\lang1033 orta}{\b\lang1033  ranco}{\lang1033  = "the king }{\i\lang1033 raises}{\lang1033  an arm".)
\par \tab Let us then consider some "irregular" Quenya verbs. The verb }{\b\lang1033 farya}{\lang1033 - "to suffice, to be enough" is said to have the past tense }{\b\lang1033 farn\'eb}{\lang1033 , irregular in the sense that the ending -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{
\lang1033  of the verbal stem drops out before the past tense ending -}{\b\lang1033 n\'eb}{\lang1033 : We might have expected **}{\b\lang1033 faryan\'eb}{\lang1033 , but the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 
 lists a few more verbs that exemplify the same phenomenon: }{\b\lang1033 Vanya}{\lang1033 - "to go, depart, disappear" has the past tense }{\b\lang1033 vann\'eb}{\lang1033 . (Likely, Tolkien later replaced the verb }{\b\lang1033 vanya}{\lang1033 - with }
{\b\lang1033 auta}{\lang1033 - of similar meaning, but we may still consider it here.) To these examples from the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033  (see entries }{\i\lang1033 PHAR}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 WAN}{\lang1033 
) we may add a verb the student is supposed to have memorized as part of the previous lesson: }{\b\lang1033 lelya}{\lang1033 - "to go, proceed, travel" from WJ:363. Its past tense is not **}{\b\lang1033 lelyan\'eb}{\lang1033 , but }{\b\lang1033 lend\'eb}{
\lang1033 , seemingly a quite irregular form (though not as wildly irregular as English "to go" vs. its past tense "went"!) The sudden appearance of the cluster }{\b\lang1033 nd}{\lang1033 
 is no big mystery; it arises by nasal-infixion of the original root }{\i\lang1033 LED}{\lang1033 . (This root is listed in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 , though according to a later source, }{\i\lang1033 LED}{\lang1033 
 is reworked from even more primitive }{\i\lang1033 DEL}{\lang1033 . }{\b\lang1033 Lelya}{\lang1033 - is meant to descend from primitive }{\i\lang1033 ledy\'e2}{\lang1033 - [}{\i\lang1033 ledj\'e2}{\lang1033 -], "since }{\i\lang1033 dj}{\lang1033  became 
}{\i\lang1033 ly}{\lang1033  medially in Quenya" [WJ:363]. The past tense }{\b\lang1033 lend\'eb}{\lang1033  would come from }{\i\lang1033 lend\'ea}{\lang1033 , not so dissimilar from the verb }{\i\lang1033 ledy\'e2}{\lang1033 
- as these forms later became.) The real mystery here is this: Why do the verbs }{\b\lang1033 farya}{\lang1033 -, }{\b\lang1033 vanya}{\lang1033 -, and }{\b\lang1033 lelya}{\lang1033 - surrender the ending -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033  in the past tense?

\par \tab It may be noted that by their meaning, all three verbs are distinctly }{\i\lang1033 intransitive}{\lang1033 : To suffice, to disappear, to go. This could be just a coincidence, of course, but the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 
 provides us with another highly interesting example. In the entry }{\i\lang1033 ULU}{\lang1033 , a verb }{\b\lang1033 ulya}{\lang1033 - "to pour" is listed. Tolkien indicated that it has a }{\i\lang1033 double past tense}{\lang1033 
. If the verb is used in a transitive sense, as in "the servant poured water into a cup", the past tense "poured" is }{\b\lang1033 ulyan\'eb}{\lang1033 . This would be an entirely "regular" form. However, if the verb is used }{\i\lang1033 intransitively}{
\lang1033 , the past tense of }{\b\lang1033 ulya}{\lang1033 - is }{\b\lang1033 ull\'eb}{\lang1033  instead (presumably representing older }{\i\lang1033 unl\'eb}{\lang1033 , formed by nasal-infixion from }{\b\lang1033 ul}{\lang1033 - without the ending -}{
\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033 ; cf. }{\b\lang1033 vill\'eb}{\lang1033  as the past tense of }{\b\lang1033 vil}{\lang1033 - "to fly", though in the latter case no ending -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033 
 appears in any form of the verb). So if you want to translate "the river }{\i\lang1033 poured}{\lang1033  into a gorge", the form to use is }{\b\lang1033 ull\'eb}{\lang1033 , not }{\b\lang1033 ulyan\'eb}{\lang1033 .
\par \tab It seems, then, that we can discern a pattern here: Intransitive verbs in -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033  drop this ending 
in the past tense; the past tense is formed from the ending-less root, as in the case of primary verbs. Or put differently: In the past tense, intransitive verbs in -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033 
 surrender this ending to masquerade as primary verbs. In the rare cases where a verb can be both transitive and intransitive, the ending -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033  is retained when it is used in a transitive sense (as in the pa.t. form }{\b\lang1033 
ulyan\'eb}{\lang1033 ), but dropped when the verb is used in an intransitive sense (}{\b\lang1033 ull\'eb}{\lang1033 ).
\par \tab }{\i\lang1033 Why}{\lang1033  this should be so is of course entirely obscure. In other tenses than the past, the verb }{\b\lang1033 ulya}{\lang1033 
- "to pour" would seem to appear in the same form no matter whether it is transitive or intransitive (aorist }{\b\lang1033 ulya}{\lang1033  "pours", present tense }{\b\lang1033 uly\'eba}{\lang1033  "is pouring", future }{\b\lang1033 ulyuva}{\lang1033 
 "shall pour" etc.) But it was never Tolki
en's intention to make a new Esperanto, a language aiming to be 100 % regular and logical. Within his mythos, Quenya is supposed to be an ordinary spoken tongue, developed over thousands of years. Hence, Tolkien may deliberately have included what you wil
l find in any natural language: certain features that don't necessarily make immediate "sense".
\par \tab Most verbs in -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033  are transitive, and would presumably retain their ending in the past tense, before the pa.t. suffix -}{\b\lang1033 n\'eb}{\lang1033  is added (as in the attested example }{\b\lang1033 ulyan\'eb}{\lang1033 
). Here are most of the remaining }{\i\lang1033 intransitive}{\lang1033  verbs in -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033 , though Tolkien did not actually mention any past tense forms in their case: }{\b\lang1033 hwinya}{\lang1033 
- "to swirl, to gyrate" (past tense }{\b\lang1033 hwinn\'eb}{\lang1033 ?), }{\b\lang1033 mirilya}{\lang1033 - "to glitter" (pa.t. }{\b\lang1033 mirill\'eb}{\lang1033 ? \endash  cf. }{\b\lang1033 ulya}{\lang1033 -, pa.t. }{\b\lang1033 ull\'eb}{\lang1033 )
, }{\b\lang1033 ranya}{\lang1033 - "to stray" (pa.t. }{\b\lang1033 rann\'eb}{\lang1033 ?), }{\b\lang1033 s\'faya}{\lang1033 - "to breathe" (pa.t. }{\b\lang1033 s\'fan\'eb}{\lang1033 ?), }{\b\lang1033 tiuya}{\lang1033 - "to swell, grow fat" (pa.t. }{
\b\lang1033 tiun\'eb}{\lang1033 ?) The verb }{\b\lang1033 yerya}{\lang1033 - can be both transitive "to wear (out)" and intransitive "to get old". Perhaps the past tense is }{\b\lang1033 yeryan\'eb}{\lang1033  in the former sense and }{\b\lang1033 yern
\'eb}{\lang1033  in the latter sense, just like we have transitive }{\b\lang1033 ulyan\'eb}{\lang1033  coexisting with intransitive }{\b\lang1033 ull\'eb}{\lang1033  as the past tense "poured"?
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 I should add that all of this is somewhat hypothetical, since Tolkien did not actually mention the past tense of very many intransitive verbs in -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033 
. But the student should at least notice the }{\i\lang1033 attested}{\lang1033  "irregular" past tenses, including the double pa.t. of }{\b\lang1033 ulya}{\lang1033 - "to pour" and especially }{\b\lang1033 lend\'eb}{\lang1033 
 "went" as the rather unexpected past tense form of }{\b\lang1033 lelya}{\lang1033 - "to go, travel, proceed".
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\fs20\lang1033 NOTE: The }{\i\fs20\lang1033 perfect}{\fs20\lang1033  tense of this verb appears as }{\b\fs20\lang1033 lendi\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  in some texts. SD:56 indicates that in one draft, Tolkien used }{\b\fs20\lang1033 lendien}{\fs20\lang1033 
 rather than }{\b\fs20\lang1033 ut\'falien}{\fs20\lang1033  for "I have come" in Elendil's Declaration ("out of the Great Sea to Middle-earth have I come"). }{\b\fs20\lang1033 Lendien}{\fs20\lang1033  would mean, 
literally, "I have gone/went/traveled" or something similar. This perfect form is not augmented, possibly simply because Tolkien had not yet invented the augment that is usually prefixed in the perfect tense. I would normally supply it, using }{
\b\fs20\lang1033 elendi\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  as the perfect of }{\b\fs20\lang1033 lelya}{\fs20\lang1033 -. I have used this perfect in (the key to) one of the exercises below.}{\b\i\fs32\lang1033 
\par }{\b\fs32\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\cf2\lang1033 PASSIVE PARTICIPLES}{\lang1033 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Then we will return to the participles. The logical counterpart of the active participles discussed in the previous lesson is obviously the }{\i\lang1033 passive participles}{\lang1033 
. They are often called "past participles" instead (just like the active participles are frequently referred to as "present participles"). However, the term "passive participle" is very fitting. This participle is an adjectival form derived f
rom the stem of a verb, and it describes the state that something or someone is left in by being exposed to the corresponding verbal action. For instance: If you }{\i\lang1033 hide}{\lang1033  something, it is }{\i\lang1033 hidden}{\lang1033 
. Therefore, "hidden" is the passive participle of the verb "to hide". The word "hidden" can be used as an adjective, both predicatively ("the treasure is hidden") and attributively ("hidden treasure"). The}{\i\lang1033  passive participle}{\lang1033 
 "hidden" contrasts with the }{\i\lang1033 active participle}{\lang1033  "hiding": The latter describes the state of the }{\i\lang1033 subject}{\lang1033 , the acting party, whereas the passive participle describes the state of the }{\i\lang1033 object}{
\lang1033 , the one passively exposed to the verbal action.
\par \tab In the case of intransitive verbs, where no object can be involved, this participle describes the state of the subject itself }{\i\lang1033 after}{\lang1033  carrying out the verbal action in question: If you }{\i\lang1033 fall}{\lang1033 
, you will thereafter be }{\i\lang1033 fallen}{\lang1033 ; if you }{\i\lang1033 go}{\lang1033 , you will thereafter be }{\i\lang1033 gone}{\lang1033 . Here the often-used term "past participle" makes sense; participles like }{\i\lang1033 fallen}{
\lang1033  or }{\i\lang1033 gone}{\lang1033  describe the condition of the subject after carrying out some "past" action. They are seen to contrast with the "present participles" (active participles) }{\i\lang1033 falling}{\lang1033  and }{\i\lang1033 
going}{\lang1033 , which describe the condition of the subject while the verbal action is still "present" or on-going. But as long as we are dealing with transitive verbs \endash  and most verbs are transitive \endash 
 I still think it is better to speak of "active participles" vs. "passive participles".
\par \tab In English, quite a few passive participles have the ending -}{\i\lang1033 en}{\lang1033 , as in the examples }{\i\lang1033 hidden}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 fallen}{\lang1033 
 above. But in very many cases, English passive participles are similar in form to the past tense of verbs, though the words have wildly different functions (a form like }{\i\lang1033 tormented}{\lang1033 
 is a past tense verb in a sentence like "they tormented the Dwarf", but a passive participle in a sentence like "the Dwarf was tormented"). So what do the corresponding Quenya forms look like?
\par \tab The vast majority of Quenya participles seem to be formed by means of the ending -}{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033  or its longer variant -}{\b\lang1033 ina}{\lang1033 . Some attested A-stem participles are seen to include the longer ending, the final -}{
\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  of the verbal stem and the }{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  of the suffix -}{\b\lang1033 ina}{\lang1033  merging into a diphthong -}{\b\lang1033 ai}{\lang1033 
- (which receives the stress, like any diphthong in the second-to-last syllable). An example is provided by the phrase }{\b\lang1033 Arda Hastaina}{\lang1033 
, "Arda Marred", an Elvish term for the world as it is, tainted by the evil of Morgoth (MR:254). This }{\b\lang1033 hastaina}{\lang1033  "marred" would seem to be the passive participle of a verb }{\b\lang1033 hasta}{\lang1033 
- "to mar", not otherwise attested. However, the verb }{\b\lang1033 hosta}{\lang1033 - "to gather, collect, assemble" is attested both in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033  (entry }{\i\lang1033 KHOTH}{\lang1033 ) and in the }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{
\lang1033  poem (MC:222-223). Its passive participle turns up in }{\i\lang1033 F\'edriel's Song}{\lang1033 , where it is implied to be }{\b\lang1033 hostaina}{\lang1033  (attested in the form }{\b\lang1033 hostaini\'e9va}{\lang1033  "will be gather
ed"; the suffix -}{\b\lang1033 i\'e9va}{\lang1033  "will be" is hardly valid in LotR-style Quenya, but the underlying participle certainly is). We can probably conclude that A-stems in -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033 
 nearly always have passive participles in -}{\b\lang1033 taina}{\lang1033 . Since }{\b\lang1033 anta}{\lang1033 - means "give", the participle "given" would be }{\b\lang1033 antaina}{\lang1033 . Since }{\b\lang1033 orta}{\lang1033 
- means "raise" (or used intransitively, "rise"), the word for "raised" (and "risen") would seem to be }{\b\lang1033 ortaina}{\lang1033 .
\par \tab Perhaps the ending -}{\b\lang1033 ina}{\lang1033  can be added to nearly all A-stems? From a verb like }{\b\lang1033 mapa}{\lang1033 - "grasp, seize", I think we may well derive }{\b\lang1033 mapaina}{\lang1033 
 as the participle "grasped, seized". (Indirect support for this: The ending -}{\b\lang1033 ina}{\lang1033  is also used to derive adjectives, as in }{\b\lang1033 valaina}{\lang1033  "divine" \endash  obviously an adjectival formation based on }{
\b\lang1033 Vala}{\lang1033 , which noun is analogous in form to a simple A-stem like }{\b\lang1033 mapa}{\lang1033 -. Indeed it is hinted that the noun }{\b\lang1033 Vala}{\lang1033  is originally derived from a simple A-stem }{\i\lang1033 verb}{
\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 vala}{\lang1033 - "to order, to have power": WJ:403-4. If it had remained a verb only, }{\b\lang1033 valaina}{\lang1033  could have meant "ordered" instead.)
\par \tab The behaviour of A-stems in -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033  is slightly obscure. In the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 , Tolkien listed a root }{\i\lang1033 PER}{\lang1033  "divide in middle, halve" (cf. Sindarin }{\i\lang1033 Perian}{\lang1033 
 "halfling, Hobbit"). He then mentioned a Quenya word }{\b\lang1033 perya}{\lang1033 , evidently a verb preserving the root meaning. Immediately after }{\b\lang1033 perya}{\lang1033 , he listed an undefined word }{\b\lang1033 perina}{\lang1033 
. Is this the passive participle "halved"? I think this is almost certainly the }{\i\lang1033 meaning}{\lang1033 
 of this word, but perhaps we should see it as an independent adjectival formation derived directly from the root, not as the passive participle of the verb }{\b\lang1033 perya}{\lang1033 -. (We might have excepted }{\b\lang1033 p\'e9rina}{\lang1033 
 with a long }{\b\lang1033 \'e9}{\lang1033  if it were a passive participle; see below regarding the }{\b\lang1033 r\'e1cina}{\lang1033  pattern.)
\par \tab Elsewhere in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 , in the entry }{\i\lang1033 GYER}{\lang1033 , we have a verb }{\b\lang1033 yerya}{\lang1033 - "to wear (out), get old". The same entry also mentions a word }{\b\lang1033 yerna}{\lang1033 
 "worn". As far as the English glosses are concerned, }{\b\lang1033 yerna}{\lang1033  could be the passive participle of the verb }{\b\lang1033 yerya}{\lang1033 -. Should we conclude, then, that verbs in -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033 
 form their passive participles by replacing this ending with -}{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033 ? Again I think }{\b\lang1033 yerna}{\lang1033  is not actually the participle of }{\b\lang1033 yerya}{\lang1033 
-, but rather an independent adjectival formation. The following facts support this: 1) Tolkien traced }{\b\lang1033 yerna}{\lang1033  all the way back to Primitive Elvish }{\i\lang1033 gyern\'e2}{\lang1033 
, so it was not derived from the verb later; 2) Tolkien actually listed the form }{\b\lang1033 yerna}{\lang1033  }{\i\lang1033 before}{\lang1033  he mentioned the verb }{\b\lang1033 yerya}{\lang1033 
-, again suggesting that the former is not to be derived from the latter, 3) }{\b\lang1033 yerna}{\lang1033  is glossed "old" as well as "worn", and the first gloss suggests that }{\b\lang1033 yerna}{\lang1033  is to be considered an independ
ent adjective, not a participle. Same story as with }{\b\lang1033 perina}{\lang1033  above, then. This would also go for a pair like }{\b\lang1033 halya}{\lang1033 - "veil " vs. }{\b\lang1033 halda}{\lang1033  "veiled, hidden" (entry }{\i\lang1033 SKAL}{
\i\lang1033\super 1}{\lang1033 ): The latter form Tolkien referred to Primitive Elvish }{\i\lang1033 skaln\'e2}{\lang1033  (initial }{\i\lang1033 sk}{\lang1033 - becoming }{\b\lang1033 h}{\lang1033 - and }{\i\lang1033 ln}{\lang1033  becoming }{
\b\lang1033 ld}{\lang1033  in Quenya). It may well be that in Primitive Elvish, }{\i\lang1033 skaln\'e2}{\lang1033  did count as the passive participle of the verbal root }{\i\lang1033 SKAL}{\lang1033 - "screen, hide", but its Quenya descendant }{
\b\lang1033 halda}{\lang1033  has developed into an independent adjective (one of Tolkien's glosses for this word, "shady", is also an adjective). Thus, }{\b\lang1033 halda}{\lang1033  is not necessarily the passive participle of the verb }{\b\lang1033 
halya}{\lang1033 - derived from the same root, though it has somewhat the same meaning as the actual participle would have.
\par \tab So how, really, are we to treat verbs in -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033 ? I think a highly interesting clue is provided in MR:326 (cf. MR:315), where Christopher Tolkien tells us that in a post-LotR text, Tolkien used }{\b\lang1033 Mirruyainar}{
\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 Mirroyainar}{\lang1033  for "the Incarnate" (plural). This may seem to be passive participles inflected as nouns: "incarnated ones". Removing the plural ending -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 , we are left with }{\b\lang1033 
mirruyaina}{\lang1033 /}{\b\lang1033 mirroyaina}{\lang1033  as a possible participle "incarnated" \endash  and if we peel away the presumed participial ending as well, the verb "to incarnate" would seem to be }{\b\lang1033 mirruya}{\lang1033 - or }{
\b\lang1033 mirroya}{\lang1033 -. Tolkien later changed the word }{\b\lang1033 Mirruyainar/Mirroyainar}{\lang1033  to }{\b\lang1033 Mirroanwi}{\lang1033 , not involving any -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033 
- at all, but the rejected forms may still give away what the passive participle of a verb in -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033  should look like. Such verbs would seem to have participles in -}{\b\lang1033 yaina}{\lang1033 , just like verbs in -}{\b\lang1033 
ta}{\lang1033  have participles in -}{\b\lang1033 taina}{\lang1033 . So given that }{\b\lang1033 lanya}{\lang1033 - is the verb "to weave", the word for "woven" may well be }{\b\lang1033 lanyaina}{\lang1033 . The regular passive participles of the verbs }
{\b\lang1033 perya}{\lang1033 - "to halve", }{\b\lang1033 yerya}{\lang1033 - "to wear (out)" and }{\b\lang1033 halya}{\lang1033 - "to veil" would similarly be }{\b\lang1033 peryaina}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 yeryaina}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 halyaina}{
\lang1033  (meaning much the same as the related adjectives }{\b\lang1033 perina}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 yerna}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 halda}{\lang1033 , of course, but the latter may not so clearly imply that the described states are }{\i\lang1033 
inflicted}{\lang1033  \endash  see below regarding }{\b\lang1033 harna}{\lang1033 - vs. }{\b\lang1033 harnaina}{\lang1033 ).
\par \tab We can probably conclude that nearly all A-stem verbs form their passive participles by adding -}{\b\lang1033 ina}{\lang1033 . The only exception occurring in the published corpus is the form }{\b\lang1033 envinyanta}{\lang1033 
 "healed" or more literally "renewed" (MR:405). It would seem to be the passive participle of a verb }{\b\lang1033 envinyata}{\lang1033 - "renew" (not attested by itself, but cf. Aragorn's title }{\b\lang1033 Envinyatar}{\lang1033 
 "Renewer"). This participle is formed by means of nasal-infixion intruding before the ending -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033 . We cannot know whether the more "regular" formation }{\b\lang1033 envinyataina}{\lang1033 
, itself unattested, would be a valid form.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 However, the ending -}{\b\lang1033 ina}{\lang1033  is not only used in the case of A-stems; primary verbs with }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 
 as their final consonant also form their passive participles by means of this ending. The }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{\lang1033  poem includes a form }{\b\lang1033 r\'e1cina}{\lang1033  "broken" (}{\b\lang1033 man tiruva r\'e1cina cirya}{\lang1033 [}{
\b\lang1033 ?}{\lang1033 ] "who shall see [/watch] a broken ship?", MR:222). Tolkien explicitly identified }{\b\lang1033 r\'e1cina}{\lang1033  as the passive (or "past") participle of the verb }{\b\lang1033 rac}{\lang1033 
- "to break" (MC:223). The verb "to reckon, to count" is }{\b\lang1033 not}{\lang1033 -, and in }{\i\lang1033 F\'edriel's Song}{\lang1033  we have }{\b\lang1033 n\'f3tina}{\lang1033 
 as the passive participle "counted". It seems, then, that primary verbs ending in unvoiced stops like }{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033  or }{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  form their passive participles by }{\i\lang1033 lengthening}{\lang1033  the stem-vowel and }{
\i\lang1033 adding}{\lang1033  the long ending -}{\b\lang1033 ina}{\lang1033 . We don't seem to have any attested example of the participle of a primary verb ending in -}{\b\lang1033 p}{\lang1033 
 (another unvoiced stop), but it would in all likelihood slip into the same pattern: The verb }{\b\lang1033 top}{\lang1033 - "to cover" would have the passive participle }{\b\lang1033 t\'f3pina}{\lang1033  "covered". (The verb }{\b\lang1033 top}{
\lang1033 - is listed in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 ; the poem }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  in LotR may suggest that Tolkien later changed it to }{\b\lang1033 tup}{\lang1033 -. If so, the participle would of course be }{
\b\lang1033 t\'fapina}{\lang1033  instead.) Perhaps primary verbs in -}{\b\lang1033 v}{\lang1033  also form their passive participles according to this pattern, e.g. }{\b\lang1033 l\'e1vina}{\lang1033  "allowed, granted" from the verb }{\b\lang1033 lav}{
\lang1033 - "allow, grant" (not to be confused with a similar-sounding verb meaning "lick"). We lack examples, though.
\par Attested examples don't exactly abound for other primary verbs either, but most of them probably prefer the short ending -}{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033  to -}{\b\lang1033 ina}{\lang1033 . MR:408 (cf. MR:405) indicates that Tolkien used }{\b\lang1033 
vincarna}{\lang1033  for "healed"; the more literal meaning is transparently "renewed" or wholly literally "newly-made": }{\b\lang1033 Vin}{\lang1033 - is the stem of the Quenya adjective }{\b\lang1033 vinya}{\lang1033  "new", and }{\b\lang1033 carna}{
\lang1033  "made" can only be the passive participle of the verb }{\b\lang1033 car}{\lang1033 - "make". So primary verbs ending in -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  have passive participles in -}{\b\lang1033 rna}{\lang1033 
 (and because of the consonant cluster here arising, the stem-vowel preceding it obviously can }{\i\lang1033 not}{\lang1033  be lengthened as in the }{\b\lang1033 r\'e1cina}{\lang1033  class discussed above). Given that }{\b\lang1033 mer}{\lang1033 
- is the Quenya verb "to want", the }{\i\lang1033 Wanted}{\lang1033  posters of the Quenya Wild West would evidently read }{\b\lang1033 Merna}{\lang1033 . Perhaps }{\b\lang1033 m\'e9rina}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 c\'e1rina}{\lang1033  (following }{
\b\lang1033 r\'e1cina}{\lang1033 ) would be possible alternative passive participles of }{\b\lang1033 mer}{\lang1033 -, }{\b\lang1033 car}{\lang1033 -, perhaps not. I think it is best to let the attested example }{\b\lang1033 carna}{\lang1033 
 guide us here.
\par For primary verbs in -}{\b\lang1033 m}{\lang1033  and -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 , we only have what may be called indirect examples of their passive participles, but they are probably good enough. The verb }{\b\lang1033 nam}{\lang1033 - "to judge" (}{
\b\lang1033 namin}{\lang1033  "I judge", VT41:13) seems to have the passive participle }{\b\lang1033 namna}{\lang1033 . This form is attested as a }{\i\lang1033 noun}{\lang1033  meaning "statute" (as in }{\b\lang1033 Namna Finw\'eb M\'edriello}{\lang1033 
, "the Statute of Finw\'eb and M\'edriel", MR:258). Apparently the participle }{\b\lang1033 namna}{\lang1033 , basically meaning "judged", is also used as a noun "judgement, juridical decision" and then "statute". As for primary verbs in -}{\b\lang1033 n}
{\lang1033 , we may consider such nouns as }{\b\lang1033 anna}{\lang1033  "gift" and }{\b\lang1033 onna}{\lang1033  "creature" vs. the verbs }{\b\lang1033 anta}{\lang1033 - "to give" and }{\b\lang1033 onta}{\lang1033 - "to create" (see the entries }{
\i\lang1033 ANA}{\i\lang1033\super 1}{\lang1033 , }{\i\lang1033 ONO}{\lang1033  in Etym) These are not primary verbs, of course (and in Quenya we would expect them to have the participles }{\b\lang1033 antaina}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ontaina}{
\lang1033 ) \endash  but the nouns }{\b\lang1033 anna}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 onna}{\lang1033  may descend from primitive participial formations based on the naked root-word, before -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033  was added to produce the verbs as th
ey appear in Quenya. So }{\b\lang1033 anna}{\lang1033  may come from a primitive participle "given", only later used as a noun "something that is given" = "gift". }{\b\lang1033 Onna}{\lang1033 
 might likewise represent an original passive participle "created", later used as a noun "created one" = "creature". I tend to think, therefore, that the ending -}{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033  can be added to the stems of Quenya primary verbs ending in -}{
\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 . For instance, since }{\b\lang1033 cen}{\lang1033 - is the verb "to see", }{\b\lang1033 cenna}{\lang1033  may well be the passive participle "seen". But again, }{\b\lang1033 c\'e9nina}{\lang1033  may be a permissible alterna
tive formation (perhaps we can also have }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1mina}{\lang1033  for "judged", for all I know).
\par What about primary verbs in -}{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 , such as }{\b\lang1033 mel}{\lang1033 - "love"? If we don't resort to the pattern of }{\b\lang1033 r\'e1cina}{\lang1033  once again, using }{\b\lang1033 m\'e9lina}{\lang1033 
 for "loved", the ending -}{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033  would have to be added directly to the verbal stem. But since **}{\b\lang1033 melna}{\lang1033  is not a possible Quenya word, }{\b\lang1033 ln}{\lang1033  would become }{\b\lang1033 ld}{\lang1033 
, just as in one example discussed above (Quenya }{\b\lang1033 halda}{\lang1033  descending from Primitive Elvish }{\i\lang1033 skaln\'e2}{\lang1033 ). The }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033  actually lists a word }{\b\lang1033 melda}{\lang1033 
, glossed "beloved, dear
". These glosses are adjectives, but by their meaning they are of course very close to the participle "loved". So are we once again looking at an original participle that has developed into an independent adjective? Would the actual participle of }{
\b\lang1033 mel}{\lang1033 - differ in form, precisely to distinguish it from this adjective? If so we might consider }{\b\lang1033 m\'e9lina}{\lang1033  again. Or is }{\b\lang1033 melda}{\lang1033 
 both the adjective "dear" and the participle "loved"? One may well ask whether there is any point in even trying to distinguish between them, since their meanings would be virtually the same.
\par Another example may also be considered: The Quenya verb "to bear, to wear, to carry" seems to be }{\b\lang1033 col}{\lang1033 -, though it has never been independently attested: Only various derivations are found in our corpus. One of 
them appears in MR:385: }{\b\lang1033 colla}{\lang1033  = "borne, worn" (also used as a noun "vestment, cloak", considered as "something that is worn"). Is this an example of the past participle of a primary verb ending in -}{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 
? Can we use }{\b\lang1033 mella}{\lang1033  for "loved", then? I tend to think that }{\b\lang1033 colla}{\lang1033  is rather an adjectival derivative \endash  perhaps representing primitive }{\i\lang1033 konl\'e2}{\lang1033 
 with nasal-infixion of the root }{\i\lang1033 KOL}{\lang1033  (not in Etym). By its original derivation it would then parallel such a Quenya adjective as }{\b\lang1033 panta}{\lang1033  "open" (which Tolkien referred to Primitive Elvish }{\i\lang1033 
pant\'e2}{\lang1033 , derived from the root }{\i\lang1033 PAT}{\lang1033  listed in Etym). I'm afraid no quite certain conclusion can be reached regarding the passive participles of primary verbs in -}{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 
, but I think the safest would be to either use the ending -}{\b\lang1033 da}{\lang1033  (representing earlier -}{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033 ), }{\i\lang1033 or}{\lang1033  the longer ending -}{\b\lang1033 ina}{\lang1033 
 combined with lengthening of the stem-vowel.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par Should passive participles agree in number, like normal adjectives do? In other words, should the final -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  turn into -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  (for older -}{\b\lang1033 ai}{\lang1033 
) if the participle describes a plural noun? As far as I can see, the corpus provides no example that could guide us. We recall that active participles (ending -}{\b\lang1033 la}{\lang1033 ) do }{\i\lang1033 not}{\lang1033 
 agree in number. However, I tend to think that passive participles do behave like normal adjectives in this regard. We have just
 seen that in many cases it is difficult to even determine whether a form is to be considered a passive participle or an adjective, since adjectives may be derived with the same endings. (For that matter, this goes for English as well: An adjective like }
{\i\lang1033 naked}{\lang1033  could well have been a passive participle by its form; however, there is no corresponding verb **}{\i\lang1033 nake}{\lang1033  "denude", so we can't set up a pair **}{\i\lang1033 nake}{\lang1033 /}{\i\lang1033 naked}{
\lang1033  like we have }{\i\lang1033 love}{\lang1033 /}{\i\lang1033 loved}{\lang1033 .) Since adjectives like }{\b\lang1033 valaina}{\lang1033  "divine" and }{\b\lang1033 yerna}{\lang1033  "old" must be assumed to a
gree in number, it is difficult to imagine that participles like }{\b\lang1033 hastaina}{\lang1033  "marred" or }{\b\lang1033 carna}{\lang1033  "made" would not show such agreement. So I would change the final -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  to -}{
\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  where the participle describes a plural noun (or several nouns).
\par 
\par In English, past/passive participles are used as part of the circumlocutions which simulate the function of a true perfect tense: "The Dwarf has }{\i\lang1033 seen}{\lang1033  the Elf"; "the woman is (or, has) }{\i\lang1033 fallen}{\lang1033 
". But here Quenya would simply use the real perfect tense instead: }{\b\lang1033 I Nauco ec\'e9ni\'eb i Elda}{\lang1033 ; }{\b\lang1033 i n\'eds alanti\'eb}{\lang1033 . Perhaps }{\b\lang1033 n\'e1 lantaina}{\lang1033  is also permissible for "}{
\i\lang1033 is}{\lang1033  fallen", but rendering "the Dwarf has seen the Elf" as **}{\b\lang1033 i Nauco harya cenna i Elda}{\lang1033  (copying the English wording directly) only results in nonsense.
\par 
\par A final note: In some cases, forms in -}{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033  that were originally participial or adjectival have themselves become A-stem verbs. The primitive word }{\i\lang1033 skarn\'e2}{\lang1033 , listed in the entry }{\i\lang1033 SKAR}{
\lang1033  in the }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 , was perhaps originally a passive participle "torn, rent" (since the root }{\i\lang1033 SKAR}{\lang1033  itself is said to mean "tear, rend"). In Quenya, }{\i\lang1033 skarn\'e2}{\lang1033 
 turned into }{\b\lang1033 harna}{\lang1033  "wounded", probably felt to be an adjective rather than a participle. The funny thing is that }{\b\lang1033 harna}{\lang1033 
- also came to be used as a verb "to wound", and if this verb has its own passive participle }{\b\lang1033 harnaina}{\lang1033 , we would have come full circle! In English, both }{\b\lang1033 harna}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 harnaina}{\lang1033 
 must be translated "wounded", but whereas }{\b\lang1033 harna}{\lang1033  would merely describe the state of being wounded, }{\b\lang1033 harnaina}{\lang1033  clearly implies that the wounds were }{\i\lang1033 inflicted}{\lang1033 
. Cf. the English adjective "full" (merely describing a state) vs. the passive participle "filled" (implying that the state in question results from the act of filling).
\par 
\par }{\i\cf2\lang1033 Summary of Lesson Ten:}{\lang1033  Adverbs are words used to fill in extra information about the }{\i\lang1033 how}{\lang1033 , the }{\i\lang1033 when}{\lang1033 , or the }{\i\lang1033 where}{\lang1033  of the v
erbal action described in a sentence. In English at least, an adverb can also be used to modify the meaning of an adjective, or even another adverb. \endash  The Quenya pronominal ending for "they" is apparently -}{\b\lang1033 nt\'eb}{\lang1033 
 (Tolkien probably dropped the ending -}{\b\lang1033 lto}{\lang1033  occurring in early material); the corresponding object ending "them" seems to be -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  (though some think it is dual "the two of them" only). \endash 
 Primary verbs, which have infinitives in -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033  (e.g. }{\b\lang1033 quet\'eb}{\lang1033  "to speak, to say"), turn into forms in -}{\b\lang1033 ita}{\lang1033 - if a pronominal ending denoting the object is to be added (e.g. }{
\b\lang1033 quetitas}{\lang1033  "to say it", with the ending -}{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  "it"). \endash  Available examples seem to suggest that intransitive verbs in -}{\b\lang1033 ya}{\lang1033 
 drop this ending in the past tense, which is formed directly from the stem instead (as if the verb were a primary verb). For instance, the pa.t. of }{\b\lang1033 farya}{\lang1033 - "to suffice" is }{\b\lang1033 farn\'eb}{\lang1033 , not **}{\b\lang1033 
faryan\'eb}{\lang1033 . \endash  Passive participles are adjectival derivatives that usually describe the state that is inflicted on someone or something by the corresponding verbal action: what you }{\i\lang1033 hide}{\lang1033  (verb) becomes }{
\i\lang1033 hidden}{\lang1033  (passive participle). A-stem verbs seem to form their passive participles in -}{\b\lang1033 ina}{\lang1033  (e.g. }{\b\lang1033 hastaina}{\lang1033  "marred" from }{\b\lang1033 hasta}{\lang1033 
- "to mar"). This ending is also used in the case of primary verbs ending in -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  and -}{\b\lang1033 c}{\lang1033 , probably also -}{\b\lang1033 p}{\lang1033  and possibly even -}{\b\lang1033 v}{\lang1033 
; in this class of verbs, the ending is combined with lengthening of the stem-vowel (e.g. }{\b\lang1033 r\'e1cina}{\lang1033  "broken" from }{\b\lang1033 rac}{\lang1033 - "to break"). It may be that the same pattern can be applied to }{\i\lang1033 all}{
\lang1033  primary verbs, but verbs in -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  are seen to take the simple ending -}{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033  instead, with no lengthening of the stem-vowel (}{\b\lang1033 carna}{\lang1033  "made" from }{\b\lang1033 car}{\lang1033 
- "to make"). Primary verbs in -}{\b\lang1033 m}{\lang1033 , and probably also -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 , would similarly take the simple ending -}{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033  (e.g. }{\b\lang1033 namna}{\lang1033  "judged" from }{\b\lang1033 nam}{
\lang1033 - "to judge", }{\b\lang1033 cenna}{\lang1033  "seen" from }{\b\lang1033 cen}{\lang1033 - "to see"). It is somewhat uncertain how we should treat primary verbs in -}{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033 ; if we are to use the simple ending -}{\b\lang1033 na}
{\lang1033 , it would turn into -}{\b\lang1033 da}{\lang1033  for phonological reasons (e.g. }{\b\lang1033 melna}{\lang1033  > }{\b\lang1033 melda}{\lang1033  "loved" as the passive participle of }{\b\lang1033 mel}{\lang1033 - "to love"; }{\b\lang1033 
melda}{\lang1033  is attested as an adjective "beloved, dear"). Passive participles probably agree in number in the same way as adjectives, changing -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  to -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033 
 if they describe a plural noun or several nouns.
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\cf2\lang1033 VOCABULARY
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 nert\'eb}{\lang1033  "nine"
\par }{\b\lang1033 n\'fara}{\lang1033  "deep"
\par }{\b\lang1033 anwa}{\lang1033  "real, actual, true"
\par }{\b\lang1033 nulda}{\lang1033  "secret"
\par }{\b\lang1033 telda}{\lang1033  "final" }{\fs20\lang1033 (adjective derived from the same root as the name of the }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Teleri}{\fs20\lang1033 , the Third Clan of the Eldar, so called because they were always the }{\i\fs20\lang1033 last}{
\fs20\lang1033  or hindmost during the March from Cuivi\'e9nen \endash  far behind the Vanyar and the Noldor, who were more eager to reach the Blessed Realm)}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 linta}{\lang1033  "swift" }{\fs20\lang1033 (pl. }{\b\fs20\lang1033 lint\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  in }{\i\fs20\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033 , which poem refers to }{\b\fs20\lang1033 lint\'eb yuldar}{\fs20\lang1033  = "swift draughts")}{
\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 hosta}{\lang1033 - "to assemble, gather"}{\b\lang1033 
\par n\'f3r\'eb}{\lang1033  "land" }{\fs20\lang1033 (a land associated with a particular people, WJ:413) }{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 lamb\'eb}{\lang1033  "tongue = language" }{\fs20\lang1033 (not "tongue" as a body part)}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 car}{\lang1033 - "to make, to do"
\par }{\b\lang1033 farya}{\lang1033 - "to suffice, to be enough", pa.t. }{\b\lang1033 farn\'eb}{\lang1033  }{\fs20\lang1033 (NOT **}{\b\fs20\lang1033 faryan\'eb}{\fs20\lang1033  \endash  because the verb is intransitive?)}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 ve}{\lang1033  preposition "as, like"
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\b\cf2\lang1033 EXERCISES
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par Translate into English:
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright {\i\lang1033 A}{\lang1033 . }{\b\lang1033 Melinyet n\'farav\'eb.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\lang1033 B.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Lindant\'eb vanyav\'eb, ve Eldar.}{\i\lang1033 
\par C.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Ily\'eb nert\'eb andor nar tirn\'eb.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 D.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Merint\'eb hiritas lintav\'eb.
\par }{\i\lang1033 E.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Haryaly\'eb atta parmar, ar teldav\'eb ecendielyet.}{\lang1033 
\par }{\i\lang1033 F.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 Anwav\'eb ec\'e9nien Elda.
\par }{\i\lang1033 G. }{\b\lang1033 I nurtaina harma \'fava hirna.
\par }{\i\lang1033 H.}{\lang1033  }{\b\lang1033 \'dament\'eb mer\'eb caritas, an cenitas farn\'eb.}{\lang1033 
\par 
\par Translate into Quenya:
\par 
\par }{\i\lang1033 I.}{\lang1033  They have traveled [/gone] secretly through the land.
\par }{\i\lang1033 J. }{\lang1033 The assembled Elves wanted to see it.
\par }{\i\lang1033 K.}{\lang1033  Written language is not like spoken language.
\par }{\i\lang1033 L}{\lang1033 . Five ships were not enough [/did not suffice]; nine sufficed.
\par }{\i\lang1033 M}{\lang1033 . I will really stop doing it [/truly cease to do it].
\par }{\i\lang1033 N}{\lang1033 . They swiftly gathered the nine terrified Dwarves.
\par }{\i\lang1033 O.}{\lang1033  Finally you will see them as you have wanted to see them.
\par }{\i\lang1033 P.}{\lang1033  They don't want to hear it.}{\fs32\lang1033 
\par }{\lang1033 
\par 
\par }{\i\lang1033 Lessons 11-15 may be downloaded from this URL:}{\lang1033 
\par http://www.uib.no/People/hnohf/less-c.rtf
\par }}