{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff0\deflang1033\deflangfe1044{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;
\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;
\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\title Q-faq}{\author Helge K\'e5re Fauskanger}{\operator Helge K\'e5re Fauskanger}
{\creatim\yr2001\mo12\dy31\hr23\min35}{\revtim\yr2001\mo12\dy31\hr23\min35}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages9}{\nofwords3725}{\nofchars21234}{\*\company  }{\nofcharsws26076}{\vern73}}\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl1417\margr1417\margt1417\margb1417 
\deftab708\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphhotz425\formshade\viewkind4\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot \fet0\sectd \linex0\headery709\footery709\colsx709\endnhere\sectdefaultcl {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2
\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs28\lang1044\cgrid {\b\fs36\cf6\lang1033 APPENDICES
\par }{\lang1033 
Based on all published material (and then some), I have set out most of the information about Quenya that I feel we can infer with a minimum of confidence. These Appendices to the course proper will supply some extra information, but primarily t
hey will be devoted to discussing certain features of Quenya that are not so well attested or understood that I felt able to construct any exercises touching on these matters. If more Quenya material is published in the future, I may also summarize the ne
w information here (unless or until I work it into the existing lessons, or write additional lessons to cover the fresh info).
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 WHAT IS THE FUNCTION OF THE PARTITIVE PLURAL?
\par }{\lang1033 In this course we have discussed three Quenya numbers: singular, plural, and dual. There is however also a fourth, called the }{\i\lang1033 partitive plural}{\lang1033 
, ignored throughout this course because I feel its function is not well understood. Hence I am also unable to guarantee that Tolkien would not have used the partitive plural where I have used the "normal" plural in some of the exercises of this course.

\par \tab Before discussing the possible function of the partitive plural, we will discuss how it is formed. The basic ending is -}{\b\lang1033 li}{\lang1033 , derived from a root }{\i\lang1033 LI}{\lang1033  "many" which is also the source of the noun }{
\b\lang1033 li\'eb}{\lang1033  "people". The Plotz Letter points to }{\b\lang1033 lasseli}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ciryali}{\lang1033  as the partitive plural forms of }{\b\lang1033 lass\'eb}{\lang1033  "leaf" and }{\b\lang1033 cirya}{\lang1033 
 "ship". It is less than clear how -}{\b\lang1033 li}{\lang1033  can be added to nouns ending in a consonant, for this would normally result in impossible consonant clusters (only nouns ending in -}{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033  can receive the ending -}{
\b\lang1033 li}{\lang1033  with no further ado, since Quenya does permit double }{\b\lang1033 ll}{\lang1033 ). In one attested example, involving the partitive plural of }{\b\lang1033 Casar}{\lang1033  "dwarf" (based on Dwarvish }{\i\lang1033 Khaz\'e2d}{
\lang1033  and an alternative to the native word }{\b\lang1033 Nauco}{\lang1033 ), we see assimilation: instead of the impossible form **}{\b\lang1033 Casarli}{\lang1033  we have }{\b\lang1033 Casalli}{\lang1033 . The }{\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033 
 likewise points to }{\b\lang1033 Telelli}{\lang1033  as the partitive plural of }{\b\lang1033 Teler}{\lang1033  (an Elf of the Third Clan); see WJ:388, LR:391. 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Nouns ending in -}{\b\lang1033 s}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  may also assimilate this consonant to }{\b\lang1033 l}{\lang1033  before the ending -}{\b\lang1033 li}{\lang1033 
, so perhaps the partitive plural of nouns like }{\b\lang1033 elen}{\lang1033  "star" or }{\b\lang1033 olos}{\lang1033  "dream" would be }{\b\lang1033 elelli}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ololli}{\lang1033 . The behaviour of nouns ending in -}{\b\lang1033 t}
{\lang1033 , like }{\b\lang1033 nat}{\lang1033  "thing", must remain a mystery for now. Either the impossible form **}{\b\lang1033 natli}{\lang1033  would have its consonants swapped around, producing }{\b\lang1033 nalti}{\lang1033 
, or we must probably slip in some connecting vowel \endash  perhaps resulting in a form like }{\b\lang1033 nateli}{\lang1033  (with the same extra vowel -}{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033 - as in }{\b\lang1033 Elendil}{\b\ul\lang1033 e}{\b\lang1033 nna}{
\lang1033  "to Elendil", PM:401).
\par As for the various case forms as set out in the Plotz Letter, the archaic "Book Quenya" is to have the long ending -}{\b\lang1033 l\'ed}{\lang1033  in the nominative and the accusative alike, but in later Quenya, this is shortened to -}{\b\lang1033 li}{
\lang1033  as in the examples above. The ending -}{\b\lang1033 l\'ed}{\lang1033 - with a long vowel is however still used before the endings -}{\b\lang1033 nen}{\lang1033  for instrumental and -}{\b\lang1033 va}{\lang1033 
 for possessive, so in these two cases, the partitive plural form }{\b\lang1033 ciryali}{\lang1033  appears as }{\b\lang1033 ciryal\'ednen}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 ciryal\'edva}{\lang1033 
 respectively (and the long vowel of course receives the accent). The genitive simply adds the ending -}{\b\lang1033 on}{\lang1033  as in the normal plural, hence }{\b\lang1033 ciryalion}{\lang1033 . The dative adds the simplest dative ending -}{
\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 , hence }{\b\lang1033 ciryalin}{\lang1033 .
\par In the locative, allative and ablative, it is optional whether one uses the simplest endings -}{\b\lang1033 ss\'eb}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 nna}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 llo}{\lang1033  }{\i\lang1033 or}{\lang1033  their plural forms -}{\b\lang1033 
ssen}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 nnar}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 llon}{\lang1033  (alternatively -}{\b\lang1033 llor}{\lang1033 ). The ending -}{\b\lang1033 li}{\lang1033 
- already indicates that the word is plural, so whether or not a second plural indicator follows at the end of the word is not important. Hence locative }{\b\lang1033 ciryaliss\'eb}{\lang1033  = }{\b\lang1033 ciryalissen}{\lang1033 , allative }{
\b\lang1033 ciryalinna}{\lang1033  = }{\b\lang1033 ciryalinnar}{\lang1033 , ablative }{\b\lang1033 ciryalillo}{\lang1033  = }{\b\lang1033 ciryalillon}{\lang1033  (or }{\b\lang1033 ciryalillor}{\lang1033 ). In }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033 
 in LotR, Tolkien used }{\b\lang1033 falmalinnar}{\lang1033  as the partitive plural allative of the noun }{\b\lang1033 falma}{\lang1033  "(foaming) wave", so writers who want to use a strictly LotR-style form of Quenya may opt for the forms 
with double plural marking.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab Listing the forms is easy; it is rather more difficult to tell precisely what their }{\i\lang1033 function}{\lang1033  is. If }{\b\lang1033 ciryar}{\lang1033 
 is simply "ships", how does the alternative plural form }{\b\lang1033 ciryali}{\lang1033  differ in meaning?
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 In English translation, Tolkien renders the "partitive plural" forms in -}{\b\lang1033 li}{\lang1033  as normal English plural forms (in -}{\i\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 ): The allative phrase }{
\b\lang1033 i falma}{\b\ul\lang1033 li}{\b\lang1033 nnar}{\lang1033  in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  is translated "upon the foaming wave}{\ul\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 ". However, in his interlinear translation of }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{
\lang1033  in RGEO:67, Tolkien broke this form of }{\b\lang1033 falma}{\lang1033  down as }{\b\lang1033 falma-li-nnar}{\lang1033  and indicated that the middle element means "many" \endash  which as we have seen is also the meaning of the basic stem }{
\i\lang1033 LI}{\lang1033  (LR:369). Furthermore, an Ent on one occasion used the word }{\b\lang1033 taure}{\b\ul\lang1033 li}{\b\lang1033 l\'f3m\'eba}{\lang1033 , which in LotR Appendix F is said to mean "Forest-}{\ul\lang1033 many}{\lang1033 
-shadowed". Though this is not genuine Quenya as such, but merely "fragments of Elf-speech strung together in Ent-fashion", Tolkien is again seen to imply that the element -}{\b\lang1033 li}{\lang1033  connotes "many".
\par So inevitably and not without reason, many researchers have concluded that the forms in -}{\b\lang1033 li}{\lang1033  are examples of a so-called }{\i\lang1033 multiple plural}{\lang1033 . This plural form was thought to imply that there are }{
\i\lang1033 many}{\lang1033  of the thing in question: Whereas }{\b\lang1033 ciryar}{\lang1033  is simply "ships" (few or many, but at least more than one), }{\b\lang1033 ciryali}{\lang1033  would imply "many ships". The example }{\b\lang1033 i falma}{
\b\ul\lang1033 li}{\b\lang1033 nnar}{\lang1033  "upon the foaming waves" in }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\lang1033  would agree well with this interpretation: Galadriel is singing about the waves of the wide ocean between herself and Varda \endash 
 obviously a great multitude of waves.
\par However, I fear that this interpretation of the plural forms in -}{\b\lang1033 li}{\lang1033  is too simplistic; at least this can hardly be the whole story. Treebeard greeted Celeborn and Galadriel as }{\b\lang1033 a vanimar, vanim\'e1lion nostari}{
\lang1033 , which greeting Tolkien translated as "o fair ones begetters of fair ones" (SD:73). }{\b\lang1033 Vanim\'e1}{\b\ul\lang1033 li}{\b\lang1033 on}{\lang1033  "of fair one}{\ul\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 " is the partitive plural genitive of }{
\b\lang1033 vanima}{\lang1033  "fair (one)". Again, Tolkien translates a partitive plural form as a normal English plural, and there is nothing to suggest that the meaning "of }{\i\lang1033 many}{\lang1033  fair one
s" is intended. (Unless Treebeard exaggerates to be polite, this would not agree very well with the facts either: Celeborn and Galadriel were the "begetters" of }{\i\lang1033 one}{\lang1033  known child, their daughter Celebr\'ed
an. Even if we throw in their granddaughter Arwen as well, there are still only }{\i\lang1033 two}{\lang1033  "fair ones"; this can hardly count as "many".)
\par There is also an example of a partitive plural (this time in the locative case) in the }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{\lang1033  poem, but it is not very helpful: }{\b\lang1033 Man cenuva r\'e1cina cirya ondoliss\'eb morn\'eb}{\lang1033 , which ques
tion Tolkien rendered "who shall heed a broken ship on the dark rocks[?]" (MC:222, cf. 215, 220). So here we have }{\b\lang1033 ondo}{\b\ul\lang1033 li}{\b\lang1033 ss\'eb morn\'eb}{\lang1033  = "on [the] dark rock}{\ul\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 
"; once again, a Quenya plural in -}{\b\lang1033 li}{\lang1033  is translated as a normal English plural in -}{\i\lang1033 s}{\lang1033 . While there is nothing that would preclude the possibility that the ship is described as being stranded on }{
\i\lang1033 many}{\lang1033  "dark rocks", there is nothing that would confirm this interpretation, either.
\par Early material (far predating the LotR) provides yet more examples of plurals in -}{\b\lang1033 li}{\lang1033 . In the early versions of the }{\i\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\lang1033  narratives, the clan of the Noldor are referred to as the }{\b\lang1033 
Noldoli}{\lang1033  (e.g. LT1:21). Here the ending -}{\b\lang1033 li}{\lang1033  may seem to be used as a kind of "generic plural", referring to the entire "race" of Noldorin Elves. Similarly, in the entry }{\i\lang1033 TELES}{\lang1033  in the }{
\i\lang1033 Etymologies}{\lang1033  (LR:391), Tolkien may seem to virtually equate the form }{\b\lang1033 Telelli}{\lang1033  with the compound }{\b\lang1033 Telelli\'eb}{\lang1033  "Teler-folk" (}{\b\lang1033 Teler}{\lang1033  "Telerin Elf" + }{
\b\lang1033 li\'eb}{\lang1033  "people"; notice the regular assimilation }{\b\lang1033 rl}{\lang1033  > }{\b\lang1033 ll}{\lang1033 ). However, when discussing various forms of }{\b\lang1033 Casar}{\lang1033 
 "Dwarf" in a much later (post-LotR) source, Tolkien seems to clearly distinguish between "the partitive plural" }{\b\lang1033 Casalli}{\lang1033  and "the race-name" }{\b\lang1033 Casalli\'eb}{\lang1033  (the latter evidently = "Dwarf-people", }{
\b\lang1033 Casar}{\lang1033  + }{\b\lang1033 li\'eb}{\lang1033 ). See WJ:388. In the later narratives, Tolkien also abandons the form }{\b\lang1033 Noldoli}{\lang1033  and consistently refers to this people as the }{\b\lang1033 Noldor}{\lang1033  
\endash  a "normal" plural in -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033 , even though the reference is clearly to the entire clan of Noldorin Elves as a "people". The form }{\b\lang1033 Noldoli}{\lang1033  was certainly not obsolete as su
ch, but perhaps its function was redefined.
\par In one passage in }{\i\lang1033 Letters}{\lang1033 , Tolkien makes some remarks that throw at least some light on the various plural formations, but he uses Sindarin examples:
\par 
\par }\pard \li708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 The Eldarin languages distinguish in form and use between a 'partitive' or 'particular' plural, and the general or total plural. Thus }{\i\lang1033 yrch}{\lang1033 
 'orcs, some orcs...' ... the Orcs, as a race, or the whole of a group previously mentioned would have been }{\i\lang1033 orchoth}{\lang1033 . (Letters:178)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par If }{\i\lang1033 yrch}{\lang1033  "Orcs" is an example of a Sindarin "partitive" or "particular" plural, it must correspond to a Quenya plural in -}{\b\lang1033 li}{\lang1033  (though historically, }{\i\lang1033 yrch}{\lang1033 
 is rather descended from a plural in -}{\i\lang1033 i}{\lang1033 , which plural ending still survives in Quenya). We must then equate the "normal" Quenya plural in -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  with 
the "general or total plural". According to what Tolkien says, this plural would often be used of entire }{\i\lang1033 races}{\lang1033  (or of distinct }{\i\lang1033 groups}{\lang1033  previously identified). Indeed we see forms like }{\b\lang1033 Valar}
{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 Quendi}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 Eldar}{\lang1033  referring to the relevant "races" (does this obsolete the notion that the plural in -}{\b\lang1033 li}{\lang1033  can also have this meaning, and is this why Tolkien replaced }
{\b\lang1033 Noldoli}{\lang1033  with }{\b\lang1033 Noldor}{\lang1033  in his narratives?) Of course, these plural forms can also have a more limited reference, pointing to some particular group rather than the
 entire "species" of the thing in question. Treebeard addresses Galadriel and Celeborn as }{\b\lang1033 a vanimar}{\lang1033 
 "o fair ones"; they are obviously just a couple of fair (beautiful) persons, not by themselves constituting the entire "race" of fair people in the world.
\par \tab Perhaps the system works something like this: If you refer to a group using the "normal" plural in -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  or -}{\b\lang1033 i}{\lang1033  }{\i\lang1033 and do not insert the definite article before the plural noun}{\lang1033 
, the noun may often have generic reference unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Cf. a Tolkien-made example like }{\b\ul\lang1033 Valar}{\b\lang1033  valuvar}{\lang1033 , "the will of [all] the }{\ul\lang1033 Valar}{\lang1033 
 [Gods, Powers] will be done" (WJ:404). }{\b\lang1033 Valar}{\lang1033  is here a "general or total" plural; it does not refer to "some" gods or Powers, but to the entire "race" of Valar. If you want to introduce }{\i\lang1033 some}{\lang1033 
 Valar as opposed to the entire race of gods, it would perhaps be appropriate to use the partitive plural: }{\b\lang1033 Valali}{\lang1033 . (Cf. Tolkien's implication that "some orcs" is a possible rendering of the Sindarin partitive plural }{
\i\lang1033 yrch}{\lang1033 .) The very term }{\i\lang1033 partitive}{\lang1033  plural would then suggest that we are dealing with a sub-group, a }{\i\lang1033 part}{\lang1033  of the total group of Valar in the world. But once these }{\b\lang1033 Valali
}{\lang1033  have been established as "a group previously mentioned", we would switch back to the "total" plural, that now refers to the total of the aforementioned sub-group. Now it would be appropriate to speak of this sub-group as }{\b\lang1033 i Valar
}{\lang1033  (with the definite article: }{\i\lang1033 the}{\lang1033  particular gods we are considering here).
\par \tab When Treebeard addresses Galadriel and Celeborn as }{\b\lang1033 a vanimar}{\lang1033  "o fair ones", he naturally uses the "particular" plural since he is addressing two particular "fair" people. But when he goes on to describe them as }{
\b\lang1033 vanim\'e1lion nostari}{\lang1033  "begetters of fair ones", he switches to the "partitive" plural to make it clear that Galadriel and Celeborn are the (grand)parents of }{\i\lang1033 some}{\lang1033 
 "fair ones" as opposed to all the fair ones in the world. (Perhaps Treebeard's wording could also be taken to mean that }{\i\lang1033 some}{\lang1033 , but not }{\i\lang1033 all}{\lang1033 
 of Galadriel's children were "fair" or beautiful. However, the context, as well as general courtesy, would indicate otherwise.) As for the ship that is stranded }{\b\lang1033 ondoliss\'eb}{\lang1033 , it is simply described as being stranded on }{
\i\lang1033 some}{\lang1033  rocks, }{\i\lang1033 certain}{\lang1033  rocks, a }{\i\lang1033 number of}{\lang1033  rocks.
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 So in short, it may be that Quenya would typically use the plurals in -}{\b\lang1033 li}{\lang1033 
 where English would have "some" + a plural noun. Yet the older theory of the "multiple plural" may not be entirely wrong; the fact remains that the root }{\i\lang1033 LI}{\lang1033  originally signifies "many". Perhaps it is especially when plurals in -}
{\b\lang1033 li}{\lang1033  are combined with the definite article that these forms may carry the idea of a great multitude, as in the }{\i\lang1033 Nam\'e1ri\'eb }{\lang1033 phrase }{\b\lang1033 i falmalinnar}{\lang1033 
 "upon the [?vast ocean of] foaming waves". But generally, it may be just as wise to use a separate adjective to indicate "many" (in this course we used the adjective }{\b\lang1033 rimba}{\lang1033  pl. }{\b\lang1033 rimb\'eb}{\lang1033 
, by Tolkien glossed "numerous", to express this meaning).
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 \tab Since we have so few examples, these theories must remain tentative. As I said, I certainly cannot rule out the possibility that Tolkien would sometimes have used plurals in -}{\b\lang1033 li}{
\lang1033  where I have used "normal" plurals in the exercises of this course. Much less can I tell whether he would have rejected the alternative wording as downright "wrong" or ungrammatical Quenya.
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 
\par THE APPLICATION OF CASE ENDINGS INCLUDING }{\b\i\cf2\lang3081 T}{\lang1033 
\par As we recall, there are two Quenya endings denoting dual number: -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  and -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  (e.g. }{\b\lang1033 Aldu}{\lang1033  "two trees", }{\b\lang1033 ciryat}{\lang1033 
 "two ships"). Which ending is used depends on the shape of the noun it is added to. 
\par 
\par In the Plotz Letter, Tolkien listed various case endings also including the dual element -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 -: genitive -}{\b\lang1033 to}{\lang1033 , dative -}{\b\lang1033 nt}{\lang1033 , allative -}{\b\lang1033 nta}{\lang1033 , ablative -}{
\b\lang1033 lto}{\lang1033 , locative -}{\b\lang1033 ts\'eb}{\lang1033 , instrumental -}{\b\lang1033 nten}{\lang1033 . Obviously, these are mere variations of the simplest case endings, normally associated with the singular: -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033 
, -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 nna}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 llo}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 ss\'eb}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 nen}{\lang1033 . The corresponding dual endings are derived simply by squeezing in a -}{\b\lang1033 t}{
\lang1033 - and (where necessary) adapting the result to fit Quenya phonology. So the question is: since -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  is obviously the dual marker here, are case endings including -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 - to be attached }{\i\lang1033 
only}{\lang1033  to nouns with nominative dual forms in -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 , like }{\b\lang1033 ciryat}{\lang1033 ? Maybe nouns that in the nominative receive the other dual marker, -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 , should }{\i\lang1033 not}{
\lang1033  take case endings including -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 -?
\par 
\par This is a question I briefly discussed in many of the lessons, and as I indicated, there is no certain answer available. Yet we may form a plausible theory if we can figure out how the case endings including -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 
- originally arose in the language. Perhaps Tolkien imagined that initially, the case endings were simply added to the simplest dual form in -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 .
\par 
\par Thus, starting from the simple nominative }{\b\lang1033 ciryat}{\lang1033  "two ships, a couple of ships":
\par 
\par }{\b\lang1033 ciryat }{\lang1033 + -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033  for genitive = }{\b\lang1033 ciryato}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 ciryat}{\lang1033  + -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  for dative = }{\b\lang1033 ciryatn}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 ciryat}{\lang1033  + -}{\b\lang1033 nna}{\lang1033  for allative = }{\b\lang1033 ciryatnna}{\lang1033 , simplified to }{\b\lang1033 ciryatna}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 ciryat}{\lang1033  + -}{\b\lang1033 llo}{\lang1033  for ablative = }{\b\lang1033 ciryatllo}{\lang1033 , simplified to }{\b\lang1033 ciryatlo}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 ciryat}{\lang1033  + -}{\b\lang1033 ss\'eb}{\lang1033  for locative = }{\b\lang1033 ciryatss\'eb}{\lang1033 , simplified to }{\b\lang1033 ciryats\'eb
\par ciryat}{\lang1033  + -}{\b\lang1033 nen}{\lang1033  for instrumental = }{\b\lang1033 ciryatnen}{\lang1033 
\par 
\par However, the group }{\b\lang1033 tn}{\lang1033  came to be disliked, so the consonants underwent }{\i\lang1033 metathesis}{\lang1033 ; that is, they were swapped around to produce }{\b\lang1033 nt}{\lang1033  instead. Thus the dative }{\b\lang1033 ciryatn
}{\lang1033 , the allative }{\b\lang1033 ciryatna}{\lang1033  and the instrumental }{\b\lang1033 ciryatnen}{\lang1033  turn into the actual forms listed in Plotz: }{\b\lang1033 ciryant}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ciryanta}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 
ciryanten}{\lang1033 . Likewise, }{\b\lang1033 tl}{\lang1033  is swapped around to }{\b\lang1033 lt}{\lang1033 , so that the ablative changes from }{\b\lang1033 ciryatlo}{\lang1033  to the attested Plotz form }{\b\lang1033 ciryalto}{\lang1033 
. Only the genitive }{\b\lang1033 ciryato}{\lang1033  and the locative }{\b\lang1033 ciryats\'eb}{\lang1033  persisted as they were, with no metathesis \endash 
 giving away that originally, the case endings were suffixed directly to the simplest dual form in -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 .
\par \tab If this is so, we have every reason to assume that the same case endings were suffixed to dual forms in -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  as well, for instance like this (using }{\b\lang1033 Aldu}{\lang1033  "Two Trees" as our standard example):
\par 
\par }{\b\lang1033 Aldu }{\lang1033 + -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033  for genitive = }{\b\lang1033 Alduo}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 Aldu}{\lang1033  + -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  for dative = }{\b\lang1033 Aldun}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 Aldu}{\lang1033  + -}{\b\lang1033 nna}{\lang1033  for allative = }{\b\lang1033 Aldunna}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 Aldu}{\lang1033  + -}{\b\lang1033 llo}{\lang1033  for ablative = }{\b\lang1033 Aldullo}{\lang1033 
\par }{\b\lang1033 Aldu}{\lang1033  + -}{\b\lang1033 ss\'eb}{\lang1033  for locative = }{\b\lang1033 Alduss\'eb
\par Aldu}{\lang1033  + -}{\b\lang1033 nen}{\lang1033  for instrumental = }{\b\lang1033 Aldunen}{\lang1033 
\par 
\par These forms would undergo no further changes, since they are all acceptable Quenya as far as phonology goes. By this theory, the dual case endings -}{\b\lang1033 nt}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 nta}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 lto}{\lang1033 , -}{
\b\lang1033 ts\'eb}{\lang1033  and -}{\b\lang1033 nten}{\lang1033  should only be suffixed to nouns with nominative dual forms in -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033 . Nouns with nominative dual forms in -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033 
 would merely add the simplest case endings -}{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 nna}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 llo}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 ss\'eb}{\lang1033 , -}{\b\lang1033 nen}{\lang1033 
. The sole uncertainty would relate to the dative form. It could be }{\b\lang1033 Aldun}{\lang1033  as suggested before, but as we demonstrated in Lesson Thirteen, Tolkien used the longer ending -}{\b\lang1033 en}{\lang1033 
 in one attested example dating from the period when -(}{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033 )}{\b\lang1033 n}{\lang1033  was still the genitive rather than the dative ending: }{\b\lang1033 Veruen}{\lang1033  as the genitive of the dual form }{\b\lang1033 veru}{
\lang1033  "married pair, spouses" (Etym,. entry }{\i\lang1033 LEP}{\lang1033 , cf. }{\i\lang1033 BES}{\lang1033 ). If this formation survived as such, irrespective of Tolkien's re-defining of this case ending, the dative of }{\b\lang1033 Aldu}{\lang1033 
 should be }{\b\lang1033 Alduen}{\lang1033 .
\par \tab As for the possessive-adjectival case form, no dual endings are attested anywhere. We have theorized that it should have the ending -}{\b\lang1033 twa}{\lang1033  in the case of dual forms in -}{\b\lang1033 t}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 ciryatwa}{
\lang1033  "of a couple of ships"), but if the theory set out above is correct, the ending should simply be -}{\b\lang1033 va}{\lang1033  in the case of dual forms in -}{\b\lang1033 u}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 Alduva}{\lang1033  "of [the] Two Trees"). 

\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 INFINITIVES WITH PREFIXED }{\b\i\cf2\lang3081 A}{\b\cf2\lang3081 -
\par }{\lang1033 The }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{\lang1033  poem includes two examples of a special infinitive that is marked with the prefix }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 -. (Tolkien first wrote }{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033 -, then changed it to }{\b\lang1033 a}{
\lang1033 -, perhaps suggesting that this was a grammatical feature that arose spontaneously in his mind as he worked out the later version of this poem.) The relevant couple of consecutive lines go like this:
\par 
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 Man cenuva lumbor }{\b\ul\lang1033 ahosta}{\lang1033  "Who shall see [the] clouds }{\ul\lang1033 gather}{\lang1033 ,"
\par \tab }{\b\lang1033 Menel }{\b\ul\lang1033 ac\'fana}{\lang1033 ... "the heavens }{\ul\lang1033 bending}{\lang1033 ...[?]"
\par 
\par The verbs involved are the A-stems }{\b\lang1033 hosta}{\lang1033 - "to gather" and }{\b\lang1033 c\'fana}{\lang1033 - "to bend". What is the function of the }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 -prefix here occurring?
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 Tolkien provided a brief, rather obscure note about it: "When the bare stem of the verb is used (as after 'see' or 'hear') as infinitive [}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 
-] is prefixed if the noun is the object not the subject" (MC:223). There are at least two possible interpretations of this, but the "traditional" interpretation \endash  reflected in many post-Tolkien texts \endash  goes like
 this: Following sense-verbs (like "see", "watch", "hear" etc.) we will typically find some noun that is the }{\i\lang1033 object}{\lang1033  of the sense-verb in question. In the examples above, }{\b\lang1033 lumbor}{\lang1033  "clouds" and }{
\b\lang1033 Menel}{\lang1033  "the heavens" are the }{\i\lang1033 objects}{\lang1033  (not the subjects!) of the verb }{\b\lang1033 cenuva}{\lang1033 , "shall see". Nonetheless, these verbs are also the logical }{\i\lang1033 subjects}{\lang1033 
 of the verbs "to gather" and "to bend": The clouds gather, the heavens bend. So to express what an object }{\i\lang1033 is itself}{\lang1033  }{\i\lang1033 doing}{\lang1033  while it is the subject of another verb, you use an infinitive with a prefixed }
{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 -. In other words, }{\b\lang1033 man cenuva lumbor }{\b\ul\lang1033 ahosta}{\lang1033  is the Quenya way of saying "who shall see [the] clouds }{\ul\lang1033 as they gather}{\lang1033 
". But unlike "gather" in this English circumlocution, }{\b\lang1033 ahosta}{\lang1033  remains an infinitive, as is clearly seen by the fact that it does not receive the plural ending -}{\b\lang1033 r}{\lang1033  even though its logical subject (}{
\b\lang1033 lumbor}{\lang1033  "clouds") is plural.
\par We may wonder how the prefix }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 - would be added to a verbal stem beginning in a vowel, especially in }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 -. As suggested by Nancy Martsch in her }{\i\lang1033 Basic Quenya}{\lang1033 
, it may sometimes be best to slip in a hyphen, for instance in a sentence like }{\b\lang1033 cennen i n\'eds }{\b\ul\lang1033 a-anta}{\b\lang1033  }{\lang1033 [?] }{\b\lang1033 i seldon parma}{\lang1033 , "I saw the woman }{\ul\lang1033 give}{\lang1033 
 the boy a book".
\par It is also uncertain how the prefix }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 - would be added to primary verbs. A verb like (say) }{\b\lang1033 mat}{\lang1033 - "to eat" would probably include the ending -}{\b\lang1033 \'eb}{\lang1033 
 in its "stem" form, just as it does when it functions as an infinitive. Of course we may prefix }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 - and build a sentence like }{\b\lang1033 tirnen i Naucor }{\b\ul\lang1033 amat\'eb}{\lang1033  = "I watched the Dwarves }{
\ul\lang1033 eat}{\lang1033 " (= "I watched the Dwarves }{\i\lang1033 as they ate}{\lang1033 "). However, a form like }{\b\lang1033 amat\'eb}{\lang1033 
 would be accented on the first syllable, on the prefix itself. Perhaps we should ignore the normal stress rules and let the accent fall on the syllable following the prefix (the spelling }{\b\lang1033 a-mat\'eb}{\lang1033  could be employed to sugges
t this)? Actually, the }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{\lang1033  poem contains a relevant example involving the verb }{\b\lang1033 cir}{\lang1033 - "to sail", but in this example, the prefix }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 
- is not used at all. Correcting some likely misreadings (}{\i\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  in Tolkien's manuscript thrice being misread as }{\i\lang1033 e}{\lang1033 ), this line would go: }{\b\lang1033 Man cenuva f\'e1na cirya m\'e9tima hrastallo }{
\b\ul\lang1033 c\'edra}{\lang1033  = "Who shall see a white ship }{\ul\lang1033 sail}{\lang1033  from the last shore[?]" (Tolkien's poetic translation in MC:214 reads "who shall see a white ship leave the last shore" \endash 
 but it is clear what the literal meaning is.) The overall construction is very similar to the examples cited above; the "white ship" is the }{\i\lang1033 object}{\lang1033  of the verb }{\b\lang1033 cenuva}{\lang1033 
 = "shall see", but it is also the logical }{\i\lang1033 subject}{\lang1033  of the verb }{\b\lang1033 cir}{\lang1033 - "to sail". The latter is here simply constructed as a "continuative" stem, similar in form to the "present" or "continuous" tense: }{
\b\lang1033 c\'edra}{\lang1033 . So we must assume that "I watched the Dwarves }{\ul\lang1033 eat}{\lang1033 " could similarly be expressed as }{\b\lang1033 tirnen i Naucor }{\b\ul\lang1033 m\'e1ta}{\lang1033 
, and I think I would prefer this construction to the uncertain }{\b\lang1033 amat\'eb}{\lang1033 -form.
\par Of course, we may then ask why a simple "continuative" stem cannot replace the infinitive with prefixed }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 - }{\i\lang1033 everywhere}{\lang1033 . The verbs }{\b\lang1033 hosta}{\lang1033 - "to gather" and }{\b\lang1033 c\'fana}{
\lang1033 - "to collect" would presumably produce the forms }{\b\lang1033 host\'eba}{\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 c\'fan\'eba}{\lang1033 . Why, then, cannot "who shall see the clouds }{\ul\lang1033 gather}{\lang1033 , the heavens }{\ul\lang1033 bending}{
\lang1033 ?" be expressed as }{\b\lang1033 man cenuva lumbor }{\b\ul\lang1033 host\'eba}{\b\lang1033 , Menel }{\b\ul\lang1033 c\'fan\'eba}{\lang1033 ? Why did Tolkien use the forms }{\b\lang1033 ahosta}{\lang1033 , }{\b\lang1033 ac\'fana}{\lang1033 
 instead? Of course, for all we know, both constructions could be equally possible, and Tolkien simply picked the one that came into his head first, or the one that fit the meter of his poem better.
\par However, "Gildor Inglorion" has suggested a new interpretation of the function of the }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 - prefix that would allow us to explain all the attested forms. We have already quoted Tolkie
n's note that "when the bare stem of the verb is used (as after 'see' or 'hear') as infinitive [}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 
-] is prefixed if the noun is the object not the subject" (MC:223). Does he mean: when the "noun" (that is, the object of the main verb of the sentence) is the logical object \endash  not the subject \endash  }{\i\lang1033 of the infinitive itself}{
\lang1033 ? If so, it is obvious why the }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 -prefix is not used in a sentence like "who shall see a white ship }{\ul\lang1033 sail}{\lang1033 ...", for the ship is the logical }{\i\lang1033 subject}{\lang1033 
 of the verb "sail", not the object. This interpretation would mean that the verbs }{\b\lang1033 hosta}{\lang1033 - "gather" and }{\b\lang1033 c\'fana}{\lang1033 - "bend" are actually }{\i\lang1033 transitive}{\lang1033  in the examples where the }{
\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 - prefix occurs, not intransitive as in the English translation: "Who shall see the clouds gather, the heavens bending?" In English, it is just
 the clouds themselves that "gather" or assemble, and the heavens themselves that "bend"; they don't "gather" or "bend" something else.
\par Yet }{\b\lang1033 hosta}{\lang1033 - is also glossed "collect", which is clearly transitive. Of course, this verb could be both transitive and intransitive, just like at least one other verb in -}{\b\lang1033 ta}{\lang1033  (}{\b\lang1033 orta}{\lang1033 
- = transitive "raise" or intransitive "rise"). But if }{\b\lang1033 hosta}{\lang1033 - is taken as meaning "gather" in the transitive sense of "collect", and the prefix }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 - indicates that the "noun" next to the infinitive is 
"the object not the subject" of this verb, then }{\b\lang1033 man cenuva lumbor ahosta[?]}{\lang1033  actually means "who shall see the clouds }{\i\lang1033 being gathered?}{\lang1033 " Similarly, }{\b\lang1033 man cenuva...Menel ac\'fana}{\lang1033 
 would actually mean "who shall see...the heavens }{\i\lang1033 being bent?}{\lang1033 " By this interpretation of the }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 - prefix, our home-made example }{\b\lang1033 tirnen i Naucor amat\'eb}{\lang1033  would }{\i\lang1033 not}{
\lang1033  mean "I watched the Dwarves eat", but rather "I watched the Dwarves being eaten"! The prefix }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 - would indicate that the noun in front of the infinitive is actually to be taken as "the o
bject not the subject" of the eating concerned.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\lang1033 
\par Perhaps we shall never know with certainty which of these two interpretations is correct. It may very well be that the prefix }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 - (variant }{\b\lang1033 na}{\lang1033 
-) was spontaneously invented when Tolkien worked out the latest version of the }{\i\lang1033 Markirya}{\lang1033  poem, and that it occurs nowhere else in his notes.
\par 
\par }{\b\cf2\lang3081 ELISION OF FINAL VOWELS
\par }{\lang1033 The greeting }{\b\lang1033 elen s\'edla l\'famenn' omentielvo}{\lang1033  "a star shines on the hour of our meeting" exemplifies a frequent, but not obligatory feature of Quenya phonology: 
When a word ends in a vowel and the next word begins in one, the former vowel may drop out. Thus the final -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  of }{\b\lang1033 l\'famenna}{\lang1033  "on [the] hour" is omitted before the initial }{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033 - of }
{\b\lang1033 omentielvo}{\lang1033  "of our meeting". In Elendil's Oath occur the words }{\b\lang1033 tenn' Ambar-metta}{\lang1033 , "until the end of the world", the preposition }{\b\lang1033 tenna}{\lang1033  "until" being reduced to }{\b\lang1033 tenn}
{\lang1033 ' before the initial }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 - of }{\b\lang1033 Ambar-metta}{\lang1033  "World-end = the end of the world". Occasionally, this phenomenon may even result in new, seemingly unitary words, as when the same preposition }{
\b\lang1033 tenna}{\lang1033  "until" and the noun }{\b\lang1033 oio}{\lang1033  "endless period" are contracted: }{\b\lang1033 tennoio}{\lang1033  (for }{\b\lang1033 tenn' oio}{\lang1033 ) "forever" (UT:305, 317).
\par \tab Naturally, such omission of final vowels is especially common when one word ends in a vowel that is similar or identical to the initial vowel of the next word (like the omission of -}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033  before }{\b\lang1033 o}{\lang1033 - and 
}{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 - in the examples above). In }{\i\lang1033 F\'edriel's Song}{\lang1033  as printed in LR:72, there is a dot under some final vowels, which may be taken as a sign that they are to be elided. Replacing the dot with underlin
ing and not otherwise altering the original spelling of this "Qenya" text, we may quote the relevant phrases like this: 1) }{\b\lang1033 Ilu Il\'favatar en k\'e1r}{\b\ul\lang1033 e}{\b\lang1033  eldain}{\lang1033  "Il\'fa
vatar made the world for Elves"; here the final -}{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033  of }{\b\lang1033 k\'e1r}{\b\ul\lang1033 e}{\b\lang1033  }{\lang1033 "made" is apparently omitted before an identical vowel; 2) }{\b\lang1033 \'edr}{\b\ul\lang1033 e}{\b\lang1033 
 ilqa y\'e9va n\'f3tina}{\lang1033  "when all is counted" and }{\b\lang1033 \'edr}{\b\ul\lang1033 e}{\b\lang1033  Anarinya qeluva}{\lang1033  "when my sun shall fail"; here we have omission of final -}{\b\lang1033 e}{\lang1033  before }{\b\lang1033 i}{
\lang1033  and }{\b\lang1033 a}{\lang1033 , respectively; 3) }{\b\lang1033 eny\'e1r}{\b\ul\lang1033 e}{\b\lang1033  tar i tyel}{\lang1033  "in that day beyond the end", which if we interpret Tolkien's
 intentions correctly is a unique example of a final vowel being elided before an initial }{\i\lang1033 consonant}{\lang1033  in the next word (}{\b\lang1033 tar}{\lang1033 ).
\par \tab Yet such omission of final vowels is clearly not necessary to produce correct Quenya, which is why we ignored it in the exercises of this course. The phrase }{\b\lang1033 l\'famenn' omentielvo}{\lang1033  is }{\i\lang1033 twice}{\lang1033 
 attested in its full form }{\b\lang1033 l\'famenna omentielvo}{\lang1033  (WJ:367, Letters:424). Our small corpus also contains examples of a final vowel persisting even where the next word begins in an }{\i\lang1033 identical}{\lang1033  vowel \endash 
 as in the sentence }{\b\lang1033 aur\'eb entuluva}{\lang1033  "day shall come again", cited in the }{\i\lang1033 Silmarillion}{\lang1033 , chapter 20. Presumably this could also be shortened (}{\b\lang1033 aur' entuluva}{\lang1033 ),
 but not necessarily so. Elision of final vowels would probably be most common in the spoken language, and in poetry it may also be useful to be able to get rid of a syllable where the poetic meter demands it.
\par 
\par }{\i\lang1033 More material will be added to these appendices}{\lang1033 .
\par }}