{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff0\deflang1033\deflangfe1044{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f2\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 010068a14f020f000100}Courier New;}{\f3\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05050102010706020507}Symbol;}{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Times;}
{\f5\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Helvetica;}{\f6\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Courier;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Geneva;}
{\f8\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Tms Rmn;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Helv;}{\f10\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Serif;}
{\f11\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Sans Serif;}{\f12\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}New York;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}System;}
{\f14\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05000000000000000000}Wingdings;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 010068a14f020f000100}Tahoma;}{\f16\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Marlett;}
{\f17\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Reference 1;}{\f18\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Reference 2;}{\f19\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05020603050405020304}Times New Roman Special G1;}
{\f20\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05020603050405020304}Times New Roman Special G2;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0506020202030204}Arial Narrow;}{\f22\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0a04020102020204}Arial Black;}
{\f23\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020404030301010803}Garamond;}{\f24\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02050604050505020204}Bookman Old Style;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0806030902050204}Impact;}
{\f26\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 050b0604020202020204}Arial Special G1;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 050b0604020202020204}Arial Special G2;}{\f28\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 050b0506020202030204}Arial Narrow Special G1;}
{\f29\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 050b0506020202030204}Arial Narrow Special G2;}{\f30\fscript\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 030f0702030302020204}Comic Sans MS;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604030504040204}Verdana;}
{\f32\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Angerthas;}{\f33\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Angerthas Moria;}{\f34\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0500000000000000}Tengwar Quenya;}
{\f35\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0500000000000000}Tengwar Sindarin;}{\f36\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0500000000000000}AngloSaxon Runes;}{\f37\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000400000000000000}Tengwar Parmaite;}
{\f128\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Tahoma CE;}{\f129\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Tahoma Cyr;}{\f131\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Tahoma Greek;}{\f132\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Tahoma Tur;}{\f133\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Tahoma Baltic;}
{\f164\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial Narrow CE;}{\f165\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Narrow Cyr;}{\f167\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Narrow Greek;}{\f168\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Narrow Tur;}{\f169\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Narrow Baltic;}
{\f170\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial Black CE;}{\f171\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Black Cyr;}{\f173\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Black Greek;}{\f174\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Black Tur;}{\f175\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Black Baltic;}
{\f176\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Garamond CE;}{\f177\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Garamond Cyr;}{\f179\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Garamond Greek;}{\f180\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Garamond Tur;}{\f181\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Garamond Baltic;}
{\f182\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Bookman Old Style CE;}{\f183\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Bookman Old Style Cyr;}{\f185\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Bookman Old Style Greek;}{\f186\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Bookman Old Style Tur;}
{\f187\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Bookman Old Style Baltic;}{\f188\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Impact CE;}{\f189\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Impact Cyr;}{\f191\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Impact Greek;}{\f192\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Impact Tur;}
{\f193\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Impact Baltic;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \f11\fs20\cgrid \snext0 
Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid228502500\listsimple{\listlevel\levelnfc4\leveljc0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace0\levelindent0{\leveltext\'02\'00-;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\b\i0\fbias0 
\fi-360\li1080\jclisttab\tx1080 }{\listname ;}\listid12154564}}{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid12154564\listoverridecount0\ls1}}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\info{\title her}{\author Helge K\'e5re Fauskanger}{\operator Helge K\'e5re Fauskanger}
{\creatim\yr2002\mo12\dy25\hr19\min55}{\revtim\yr2002\mo12\dy25\hr19\min55}{\printim\yr1998\mo3\dy18\hr16\min49}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages1}{\nofwords40257}{\nofchars229467}{\*\company  }{\nofcharsws281801}{\vern73}}
\margl1417\margr1417\margt1417\margb1417 \endnotes\aendnotes\aftnstart0\hyphhotz0\aftnnar\lytprtmet\hyphcaps0\viewkind4\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot \fet0\sectd \linex0\headery709\footery709\colsx709\endnhere\sectdefaultcl {\*\pnseclvl1
\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \f11\fs20\cgrid {\b\f1\fs36 Quettaparma Quenyallo}{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1\fs16  }{\f1\fs12  }{\f1\fs16 \'86}{\b\f1  }{\f1\fs16 = poetic or archaic word  (e.g.}{\f1\fs12  }{\f1\fs16 \'86}{\b\f1\fs16 \'e9l }{\f1\fs16 "star", }{\b\f1\fs16 elen }{\f1\fs16 
being the ordinary word) or a poetic or archaic meaning of an ordinary word (e.g. }{\b\f1\fs16 russ\'eb}{\f1\fs16  "corruscation, \'86swordblade"), * = unattested form, ** = wrong form, # = word that is only att
ested in a compound or as an inflected form (e.g. #}{\b\f1\fs16 ahya}{\f1\fs16 -), LotR = }{\i\f1\fs16 The Lord of the Rings}{\f1\fs16 , Silm = }{\i\f1\fs16 The Silmarillion}{\f1\fs16  , MC = }{\i\f1\fs16 The Monsters and the Critics and other Essays}{
\f1\fs16 , MR = }{\i\f1\fs16 Morgoth's Ring}{\f1\fs16 , LR = }{\i\f1\fs16 The Lost Road}{\f1\fs16 , Etym }{\b\f1\fs16 = }{\i\f1\fs16 The Etymologies }{\f1\fs16 (in LR:347-400), FS = }{\i\f1\fs16 F\'edriel's Song}{\f1\fs16  (in LR:72), RGEO = }{\i\f1\fs16 
The Road Goes Ever On}{\f1\fs16   (Second Edition), WJ = }{\i\f1\fs16 The War of the Jewels}{\f1\fs16 ,  PM = }{\i\f1\fs16 The Peoples of Middle-earth}{\f1\fs16 , Letters = }{\i\f1\fs16 The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien, }{\f1\fs16 LT1 = }{\i\f1\fs16 
The Book of Lost Tales 1}{\f1\fs16 ,}{\i\f1\fs16  }{\f1\fs16 LT2 = }{\i\f1\fs16 The Book of Lost Tales 2, Nam}{\f1\fs16  = }{\i\f1\fs16 Nam\'e1ri\'eb }{\f1\fs16 (in LotR:398), }{\i\f1\fs16 CO}{\f1\fs16  = Cirion's Oath and its commentary in UT:305, 317, }
{\i\f1\fs16 Arct}{\f1\fs16  = }{\i\f1\fs16 "Arctic" sentence }{\f1\fs16  (in }{\i\f1\fs16 The Father Christmas Letters}{\f1\fs16 ), }{\i\f1\fs16 Markirya}{\f1\fs16  = the Markirya Poem and its commentary in MC:221-223; GL = }{\i\f1\fs16 Gnomish Lexicon}{
\f1\fs16  (in }{\i\f1\fs16 Parma Eldalamberon}{\f1\fs16  #11), QL = }{\i\f1\fs16 Qenya Lexicon}{\f1\fs16  (in }{\i\f1\fs16 Parma Eldalamberon}{\f1\fs16 
 #12), vb = verb, adj = adjective, interj = interjection, pa.t. = past tense, fut = future tense, perf = perfect tense, freq = frequentative form, inf = infinitive, gen = genitive, pl = plural form, sg = singular form. The spelli
ng used in this wordlist is regularized (}{\b\f1\fs16 c}{\f1\fs16  for }{\b\f1\fs16 k }{\f1\fs16 except in a few names, }{\b\f1\fs16 x}{\f1\fs16  for }{\b\f1\fs16 ks}{\f1\fs16 
, long vowels marked with accents rather than macrons or circumflexes;  the diaeresis is used as in most of LotR).  The spelling used in the source is usually indicated; for instance, }{\i\f1\fs16 ("k")}{\f1\fs16 
 following a word indicates that the word is spelt with a }{\b\f1\fs16 k}{\f1\fs16  instead of a }{\b\f1\fs16 c}{\f1\fs16  in Tolkien's text. When }{\b\f1\fs16 s}{\f1\fs16  in a word represents earlier \'de}{\i\f1\fs16  }{\f1\fs16 (}{\i\f1\fs16 th}{
\f1\fs16  as in "thing") and it should be spelt with the letter }{\b\f1\fs16 s\'fal\'eb}{\f1\fs16  instead of }{\b\f1\fs16 silm\'eb}{\f1\fs16  in Tengwar writing (though Tolkien himself sometimes ignored or forgot this), this is indicated by (}{
\b\f1\fs16 \'de}{\f1\fs16 ) immediately following the word in question (see for instance }{\b\f1\fs16 as\'eba aranion}{\f1\fs16 ). When }{\b\f1\fs16 n}{\f1\fs16  in a word represents earlier }{\b\f1\fs16 \'f1}{\f1\fs16  (}{\i\f1\fs16 ng}{\f1\fs16 
 as in "thing") and should be spelt with the letter }{\b\f1\fs16 noldo}{\f1\fs16  rather than }{\b\f1\fs16 n\'famen}{\f1\fs16  in Tengwar writing, this is indicated by (}{\i\f1\fs16 \'f1}{\f1\fs16 
) immediately following the word in question (see for instance }{\b\f1\fs16 Noldomar}{\f1\fs16 ). When the word is actually spelt with }{\i\f1\fs16 \'f1}{\f1\fs16  instead of }{\i\f1\fs16 n}{\f1\fs16  in the source, this is indicated by }{\i\f1\fs16 ("
\'f1")}{\f1\fs16  immediately following the word in question (see for instance }{\b\f1\fs16 nand\'eb}{\f1\fs16  #2).
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 
\par <A>
\par 
\par }{\i\f1  }{\b\f1  \tab a}{\f1  (1) vocative particle "O" in }{\b\f1 a vanimar}{\f1  "O beautiful ones" }{\i\f1 (LotR3:VI ch. 6, translated in Letters:308)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab a}{\f1  (2) "and", a variant of }{\b\f1 ar}{\f1  occurring in }{\i\f1 F\'edriel's Song}{\f1  (that also has }{\b\f1 ar}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 a}{\f1  seems to be used before words in }{\b\f1 f}{\f1 
-, but it is not known whether this idea is valid in LotR-style Quenya)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab a}{\f1  (3), also }{\b\f1 \'e1}{\f1 , imperative particle: }{\b\f1 a laita, laita te!}{\f1  "[o] bless them, bless them!", }{\b\f1 \'e1 vala Manw\'eb!}{\f1  "may Manw\'eb order it!", literally *"o rule Manw\'eb!" (see }{\b\f1 laita}{\f1 , }{
\b\f1 vala}{\f1  for reference)}{\i\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 a}{\f1 - (1) prefix occurring in the word }{\i\f1 Atalante}{\f1 , said to denote "complete". Probably just a prefixed stemvowel; cf. AN\'c1R, said to be derived from NAR. }{\i\f1 (TAL\'c1T)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab a}{\f1 - (2) a prefix occurring in the }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1  poem (Tolkien first used }{\b\f1 na}{\f1 -, then changed it). It m
ay be prefixed to verbal stems following a noun that is the object of sense-verbs like "see" and "hear" when the verb it is prefixed to describes what happens to this noun, as in }{\b\f1 man cenuva lumbor ahosta}{\f1 [}{\b\f1 ?}{\f1 ] (changed from }{
\b\f1 na-hosta}{\f1 ), "who shall see the clouds gather?" (}{\b\f1 hosta}{\f1  = "gather").
\par \tab }{\b\f1 acca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "too" (= excessively, as in "too big") -}{\i\f1 PE13:108}{\b\f1 
\par \tab Acairis }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  fem. name, "bride" }{\i\f1 (LT1:252; in Tolkien's later Quenya, "bride" is }{\b\i\f1 indis}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ac\'fana}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 see }{\b\f1 c\'fana}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ae}{\f1  (Quenya?) "day" }{\i\f1 (LEP/LEPEN/LEPEK - }{\b\i\f1 ae}{\i\f1  was written over }{\b\i\f1 ar}{\i\f1  [# 2] in the names of the Valinorean week, but }{\b\i\f1 ar}{\i\f1  was not struck out.)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab aha }{\f1 "rage", also name of tengwa 11, earlier called }{\b\f1 harma}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ahosta}{\f1  see }{\b\f1 hosta}{\f1 
\par \tab #}{\b\f1 ahya}{\f1 - "change", only attested in the past tense: }{\b\f1 ahyan\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (PM:395)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ai!}{\f1  interjection  "Ah!", "Alas!" }{\i\f1 (Nam, RGEO:66; also twice in Narqelion, untranslated.)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab aica}{\f1  (1) }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "sharp" }{\i\f1 (AYAK) }{\f1 or "fell, terrible, dire" }{\i\f1 (PM:347; according to PM:363 seldom applied to evil things)}{\f1 . In }{\b\f1 Aican\'e1ro}{\f1 , q.v.
\par }{\i\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 aica}{\f1  (2) }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "broad, vast" }{\i\f1 (LT2:338 - this early "Qenya" form is probably obsoleted by # 1 above)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab aical\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "a peak" }{\i\f1 (AYAK)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 Aican\'e1ro }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "Sharp Flame, Fell Fire", masc. name; Sindarized as }{\i\f1 Aegnor}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (So in SA:n\'e1r and PM:345; MR:323 has }{\b\i\f1 Aican\'e1r}{\i\f1 
. VT41:14, 19 instead gives }{\b\i\f1 Ecyan\'e1ro}{\i\f1  as the Q form of }{\f1 Aegnor}{\i\f1 .)}{\b\i\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab aicass\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  (1) "mountain peak"}{\i\f1  (AYAK)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 aicass\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 (2) "pinetree" }{\i\f1 (GL:17; this "Qenya" word is evidently obsoleted by # 1 above.)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab ailin}{\f1  ("g.sg. }{\i\f1 ailinen}{\f1 ", in Tolkien's later Quenya dat.sg.) "pool, lake" }{\i\f1 (AY, LIN}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 , LT2:339)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 #}{\b\f1 ailin\'eb}{\f1  (nominative uncertain) a "Qenya" word for "shore, beach" (in Tolkien's later Quenya rather }{\b\f1 hresta}{\f1 ). Only attested in inflected forms: sg. ablative }{\b\f1 
ailinello }{\f1 "shore-from" }{\i\f1 (MC:213)}{\f1 , sg. locative }{\b\f1 ailinisse }{\f1 "on shore" }{\i\f1 (MC:221)}{\f1 , pl. locative }{\b\f1 ailissen}{\f1  "on beaches" (for *}{\b\f1 ailinissen}{\f1 ?) }{\i\f1 (MC:221)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab ailo}{\f1  "lake, pool" }{\i\f1 (LT2:339; Tolkien's later Quenya has }{\b\i\f1 ailin}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab aimenal}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 aimenel}{\f1  - see }{\b\f1 lirulin}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab aina}{\f1  "holy" }{\i\f1 (AYAN)}{\f1 , derived from }{\b\f1 Ainu}{\f1 . Adopted and adapted from Valarin. }{\i\f1 (WJ:399, FS, SA)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Aini}{\f1  feminine form of }{\i\f1 Ainu}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (AYAN, LT1:248)}{\f1 ; see }{\b\f1 Ainu}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ainu}{\f1  "holy one, angelic spirit"; fem. }{\b\f1 Aini}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (AYAN, LT1:248)}{\f1 ; "one of the 'order' of the Valar and Maiar, made before E\'e4"; pl. }{\b\f1 Ainur}{\f1  attested. Adopted and adapted from Valarin }{\i\f1 (WJ:399)}
{\f1 . In the early "Qenya lexicon", }{\b\f1 ainu}{\f1  was glossed "a pagan god", and }{\b\f1 aini}{\f1  was similarly "a pagan goddess", but as Christopher Tolkien notes, "Of course no one }{\i\f1 within}{\f1 
 the context of the mythology can call the Ainur 'pagan' " (LT1:248). }{\b\f1 Ainulindal\'eb}{\f1  "Music of the Ainur" }{\i\f1 (SA:lin #2)}{\f1 , the First History }{\i\f1 (WJ:406)}{\f1 , the Song of Creation }{\i\f1 (AYAN)}{\f1  
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 aipio}{\f1  "plum tree, cherry tree" }{\i\f1 (GL:18)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab aiqua}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "steep" }{\i\f1 (AYAK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab aiqualin}{\i\f1  ("q")}{\f1  "tall", plural form (???) }{\i\f1 (MC:216; this is "Qenya" - but cf. }{\b\i\f1 aiqua}{\i\f1  above.)}{\b\f1 
\par \tab aiquen}{\f1  "if anybody, whoever" }{\i\f1 (WJ:372)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab aira}{\f1  (1) "red, copper-coloured, ruddy" }{\i\f1 (GAY) 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab aira }{\f1 (2) "old" }{\i\f1 (MC:214; this is "Qenya") }{\f1 
\par \tab [}{\b\f1 aira }{\f1 (3) "eternal"}{\i\f1  (EY)}{\f1 ]
\par }{\b\f1 \tab air\'eb}{\f1  (1) "holy", }{\b\f1 airet\'e1ri}{\f1  or }{\b\f1 Air\'eb T\'e1ri}{\f1  "holy queen" (a title of Varda, PM:363), genitive }{\b\f1 aire-t\'e1rio}{\f1  "holy-queen's" (}{\i\f1 Nam}{\f1 , RGEO:67 - but according to PM:363, }{\b\f1 
air\'eb}{\f1  is the noun "sanctity", while }{\b\f1 aira}{\f1  is the adjective "holy")
\par }{\b\f1 \tab air\'eb}{\f1  (2) "sea" (dat.sg. }{\b\f1 airen}{\f1  given) }{\i\f1 (AYAR/AIR)
\par }{\f1 \tab [}{\b\f1 air\'eb}{\f1  (3) "eternity" }{\i\f1 (EY)}{\f1 ]
\par }{\b\f1 \tab aista}{\f1 - "to dread" }{\i\f1 (G\'c1YAS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab aiw\'eb}{\f1  "(small) bird" }{\i\f1 (AIW\'ca, SA:lin #1)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Aiwendil}{\f1  "Lover of Birds" }{\i\f1 (UT:401)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Aiwenor}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Aiwenor\'eb}{\f1  (read *}{\b\f1 Aiwen\'f3r\'eb}{\f1 ?) "Birdland" = lower air }{\i\f1 (AIW\'ca)}{\f1  
\par }{\b\f1 \tab aiya}{\f1  "hail", as greeting }{\i\f1 (LotR2:IV ch. 9, see Letters:385 for translation)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab 'al}{\f1 - "thrive" }{\i\f1 (GALA; the '}{\f1  }{\i\f1 simply indicates that the original initial }{\b\i\f1 G}{\i\f1  has disappeared and needs not normally be included.)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ala}{\f1  "after, beyond" }{\i\f1 (MC:221, 214; however, LotR-style Quenya has }{\b\i\f1 pella}{\i\f1  "beyond" and evidently #}{\b\i\f1 apa}{\i\f1  "after")}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b ala}{- negative prefix "not", "un-", reduced to }{\b al}{- before a vowel (}{\i VT42:33}{, }{\i GALA}{). }{\f1 In }{\b\f1 alahasta}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Alamanyar}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 alasaila}{\f1 .}{\b\f1 
\par alahasta}{\f1  "unmarred"}{\i\f1  (MR:254)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 alasaila}{\f1  "unwise" }{\i\f1 (VT41:13, 18; }{\i VT42:33)}{\i\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab alalm\'eb}{\f1  "elm, elm-tree" }{\i\f1 (\'c1LAM, L\'c1LAM, LT1:249)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab alalmino}{\f1  "Elm"-something? }{\i\f1 (Narqelion)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab }{\f1 #}{\b\f1 Alamanya}{\f1  pl. }{\b\f1 Alamanyar}{\f1 , name of the Elves who started on the march from Cuivi\'e9nen but did not reach Aman; = }{\b\f1 \'damanyar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (MR:163) }{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab alarca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  swift, rapid"}{\i\f1  (LAK}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab alass\'eb}{\f1  "joy, merriment" }{\i\f1 (GAL\'c1S)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 alas}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 alast}{\f1 -) "marble" }{\i\f1 (QL:30, GL:39)}{\f1 .
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab alat}{\f1 - *"large, great in size" }{\i\f1 (root meaning)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (\'c1LAT)}{\f1 . In }{\b\f1 Alatair\'eb}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Alatair\'eb}{\f1  "Great Sea", name of Western Ocean between Beleriand and Valinor, called }{\i\f1 Belegaer}{\f1  in Sindarin }{\i\f1 (\'c1LAT, AYAR/AIR)}{\b\f1 
\par \tab alca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "ray of light" }{\i\f1 (AKLA-R)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab alcantam\'e9ren }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "made it shine" (with a fem.pl. subject; the ending -}{\b\f1 ren}{\f1  probably means "they" of women, but the ending does not have to be translated here) }{\i\f1 (MC:216; this is "Qenya")}{\f1 

\par }{\b\f1 \tab alcar}{\i\f1  (so spelt in CO, otherwise "alkar")}{\f1  "glory, radiance, brilliance, splendour" }{\i\f1 (WJ:369, CO, AKLA-R}{\f1 ; }{\i\f1 the latter source also lists an alternative longer form }{\b\i\f1 alcar\'eb}{\i\f1 )
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 Alcarin}{\f1  "the Glorious", title taken by Atanatar II of Gondor, also name of one of the Kings of N\'famenor }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 . Is this to be taken as a shorter form of }{\b\f1 alcarinqua}
{\f1 , q.v.?
\par }{\b\f1 alcarinqua}{\f1  "radiant, glorious" }{\i\f1 (AKLA-R [there spelt "alkarinqa"], WJ:412)}{\f1 ; noun }{\b\f1 Alcarinqu\'eb}{\f1 , "The Glorious", name of a star/planet }{\i\f1 (SA:aglar - there spelt "Alkarinqu\'eb
", but the Silmarillion Index has "Alcarinqu\'eb". The celestial body in question seems to be Jupiter, MR:435)}{\f1 . Cf. also }{\b\f1 Alcarin}{\f1 , q.v.}{\i\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab alcarain}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "shining" (pl - sg *}{\b\f1 alcara}{\f1 ?) }{\i\f1 (MC:221; this is "Qenya")}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab alcarissen }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "in light-rays" }{\i\f1 (a "Qenya" form from MC:221; }{\b\i\f1 alcar}{\i\f1  means "glory" in Tolkien's later Quenya)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab alda}{\f1  "tree" }{\i\f1 (GALAD, G\'c1LAD, SA, Nam, RGEO:66, LR:41, SD:302, LT1:249, LT2:340, VT39:7)}{\f1 , also name of tengwa 28 }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 . Pl. }{\b\f1 aldar}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 Narqelion}{\f1 ; gen. pl. }{\b\f1 aldaron}{
\f1  "of trees" in }{\i\f1 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\f1 . Etymology of }{\b\f1 alda}{\f1 , see Letters:426 and UT:266-7. The latter source states that primitive *}{\i\f1 galad\'e2}{\f1 , whence Quenya }{\b\f1 alda}{\f1 
, originally applied to stouter and more spreading trees such as oaks or beeches, while straighter and more slender trees such as birches were called *}{\i\f1 orn\'ea}{\f1 , Quenya }{\b\f1 orn\'eb}{\f1 
 - but this distinction was not always observed in Quenya, and it seems that }{\b\f1 alda}{\f1  became the general word. Place-name }{\b\f1 Aldal\'f3m\'eb}{\f1  *"Tree-night" or *"Tree-twilight" }{\i\f1 (LotR2:III ch. 4)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Aldarion}{\f1 
 masc. name, *"Son of (the) Trees" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Aldaron}{\f1  a name of Orom\'eb }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 .}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 Ald\'faya}{\f1  fourth day of the Eldarin six-day week, dedicated to the Trees }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)}{\f1 
. The word seems to include *}{\b\f1 Aldu}{\f1 , a dual form referring to the Two Trees. The N\'famen\'f3reans altered the name to }{\b\f1 Ald\'eba}{\f1  (presumably < *}{\i\f1 aldaj\'e2}{\f1 ), referring to one tree (the White) only. The dual }{\b\f1 
Aldu}{\f1  seems to occur also in }{\b\f1 Aldud\'e9ni\'eb}{\f1  "Lament for the Two Trees" (a strange word, since Quenya does not permit intervocalic }{\i\f1 d}{\f1  as in this word - perhaps the Vanyarin dialect of Quenya did) }{\i\f1 (Silm)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Aldalemnar}{\f1  "week of the Trees, Midyear week" }{\i\f1 (LEP/LEPEN/LEPEK (G\'c1LAD, YEN) )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Aldaron}{\f1  a name of Orom\'eb }{\i\f1 (G\'c1LAD)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab aldarwa}{\f1  "having trees, tree-grown"}{\i\f1  (3AR)}{\f1 . See -}{\b\f1 arwa}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ald\'eba}{\f1 ,}{\b\f1  }{\f1 what the N\'famen\'f3reans called the fourth day of the Eldarin six-day week, dedicated to Telperion, the White Tree }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)}{\f1 . The day was originally called }{\b\f1 Ald\'faya}{\f1 
, referring to both of the Two Trees, but N\'famen\'f3reans altered the name to }{\b\f1 Ald\'eba}{\f1  (presumably < *}{\i\f1 aldaj\'e2}{\f1 ), referring to one tree (the White) only. }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)}{\f1  \endash Early "Qenya" also has an adjective 
}{\b\f1 ald\'eba}{\f1  "tree-shadowed" }{\i\f1 (LT1:249)}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ald\'ebon}{\f1  "avenue of trees" }{\i\f1 (LT1:249)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab alma}{\f1  "good fortune, weal, wealth"}{\i\f1  (GALA [ALAM])
\par }{\b\f1 \tab almar\'eb}{\f1  "blessedness, 'blessings', good fortune, bliss" }{\i\f1 (GALA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab alm\'e1r\'eba}{\f1  "blessed" }{\i\f1 (GALA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Almaren}{\f1  the first abode of the Valar in Arda, apparently related to }{\b\f1 almar\'eb}{\f1  "blessedness" }{\i\f1 (Silm, LR:357)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Alm\'e1riel}{\f1  (fem. name) }{\i\f1 (GALA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab almi\'eb}{\f1  "blessedness, 'blessings', good fortune, bliss" }{\i\f1 (GALA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab alqua}{\f1  "swan" }{\i\f1 (\'c1LAK [there spelt }{\f1 alqa, }{\i\f1 as in LT1:249/LT2:335], SA:alqua, UT:265)}{\f1 . The alternative form }{\b\f1 alqu\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1 
 mentioned in early material (LT1:249) may or may not be valid in LotR-style Quenya. 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 Alqualond\'eb}{\f1  "Swan-road, Swan-haven", capital of the Teleri }{\i\f1 (\'c1LAK, LOD, KHOP}{\f1  }{\i\f1 [there spelt }{\f1 Alqalonde}{\i\f1 ], Silm).
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 Alquar\'e1m\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "Swan-wing" }{\i\f1 (LT2:335)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab alta}{\f1  *"large, great in size" }{\i\f1 (root meaning)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (\'c1LAT)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Alat}{\f1 - in }{\b\f1 Alatair\'eb}{\f1 , q.v.}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Alt\'e1riel}{\f1  "Galadriel", "maiden crowned with a radiant garland" }{\i\f1 (SA:kal; }{\b\i\f1 Alat\'e1riel}{\i\f1  is Telerin)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab alya}{\f1  "prosperous, rich, abundant, blessed" }{\i\f1 (GALA)}{\f1 , "rich" }{\i\f1 [\'c1LAM]
\par }{\b\f1 \tab am}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (prefix)}{\f1  "up" }{\i\f1 (AM}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ama}{\f1  not glossed, evidently meaning "up" like the prefix }{\i\f1 am}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (UNU)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab amaldar}{\f1  ??? }{\i\f1 (Narqelion; may include }{\b\i\f1 aldar}{\i\f1  "trees")}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab aman}{\f1  "blessed, free from evil". Adopted and adapted from Valarin. }{\i\f1 (WJ:399)}{\f1  Place-name }{\b\f1 Aman}{\f1  the Blessed Realm, from the stem }{\i\f1 m\'e2n}{\f1 - "good, blessed, unmarred" }{\i\f1 (SA:m\'e2n)}{\f1 . Adj. }{
\b\f1 amanya}{\f1  "of Aman, *Amanian" (}{\i\f1 WJ:411)}{\f1 , nominal pl. }{\b\f1 Amanyar}{\f1  "those of Aman", Elves dwelling there (with negations }{\b\f1 \'daamanyar}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Alamanyar}{\f1  "those not of Aman"). Also fuller }{\b\f1 Amaneldi}{
\f1  *"Aman-elves" }{\i\f1 (WJ:373)}{\f1 .}{\i\f1  }{\f1 Masc. name }{\b\f1 Amandil}{\f1  *"Aman-friend" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A, SA:m\'e2n)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab amandi}{\f1  pl. of }{\b\f1 \'f3man}{\f1 , q.v. }{\i\f1 (}{\b\i\f1 amandi}{\i\f1  is evidently a misreading for *}{\b\i\f1 omandi}{\i\f1 ) (OM)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Amari\'eb}{\f1  (fem. name; perhaps derived from }{\b\f1 m\'e1ra}{\f1  "good") }{\i\f1 (Silm)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab amarto}{\f1  "Fate" (also }{\b\f1 ambar}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (LT2:348; in LotR-style Quenya rather }{\b\i\f1 umbar}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 umbart}{\i\f1 -)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab amatix\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("ks")}{\f1  (dot or point placed above the line of writing)}{\i\f1  (TIK)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \'86}{\b\f1 amaur\'eba}{\f1  "dawn, early day" }{\i\f1 (Markirya)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab amba}{\f1  "up, upwards" (adv.)}{\i\f1  (AM}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1   (UNU) )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ambal}{\f1  "shaped stone, flag"}{\i\f1  (MBAL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ambalar}{\f1  "East" }{\i\f1 (MC:221; this is "Qenya")}{\b\f1 
\par \tab ambal\'eb}{\f1  "yellow bird, 'yellow hammer' " }{\i\f1 (SMAL)
\par }{\f1 \tab *}{\b\f1 ambalots\'eb}{\f1  "uprising-flower", referring to "the flower or floreate device used as a crest fixed to point of a tall [}{\i\f1 illegible word:}{\f1  ?archaic] helmet". Strangely, the word is asterisked as unattested }{\i\f1 
(WJ:319)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab amban}{\f1  "upward slope, hill-side"}{\i\f1  AM}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ambapenda}{\f1  "uphill" }{\i\f1 (adj.) (AM}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ambar}{\f1  (1) (}{\i\f1 "a-mbar"}{\f1 ) (also longer form }{\b\f1 ambaron}{\f1 , unless this is the dative singular), "oikumen\'ea [Greek: the earth as the human habitation], Earth, world" }{\i\f1 (MBAR)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Ambar-metta}{\f1 
 "the end of the world" }{\i\f1 (EO)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ambar}{\f1  (2) "doom" (variant of }{\b\f1 umbar}{\f1 ?) in }{\b\f1 Turambar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (SA:amarth)}{\f1 ; instrumental }{\b\f1 ambartanen}{\f1  "by doom" }{\i\f1 (Silm ch. 21, UT:138)}{\f1 . The early "Qenya" lexicon has }{\b\f1 ambar}{
\f1  "Fate", also }{\b\f1 amarto}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (LT2:348)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ambar}{\f1  (3) "in bosom" (locative -}{\b\f1 r}{\f1 ), nominative "bosom" presumably *}{\b\f1 amba}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (MC:213; this is "Qenya")}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ambarenya}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Ambarendya}{\f1  "Middle-earth" (but the more usual word is }{\b\f1 Endor}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 End\'f3r\'eb}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (MBAR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ambaron}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 ambar\'f3n}{\f1 - as in "g.sg. }{\i\f1 ambar\'f3nen}{\f1 ", in LotR-style Quenya this is a dative singular) "uprising, sunrise, Orient"}{\i\f1  (AM}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 . The longer form }{\b\f1 Ambar\'f3n\'eb}{
\f1  should be preferred, since }{\b\f1 ambaron}{\f1  is also the dat.sg. of }{\b\f1 ambar}{\f1  # 1.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ambar\'f3na}{\f1  place-name; presumably a variant of }{\b\f1 Ambar\'f3n\'eb}{\f1  "uprising, sunrise, Orient" }{\i\f1 (LotR2:III ch. 4; compare the }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1 , entry }{\f1 AM}{\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ambar\'f3n\'eb}{\f1  "uprising, sunrise, Orient"}{\i\f1  (AM}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ambarto}{\f1  *"upwards-exalted", mother-name (never used in narrative) of }{\b\f1 Pityafinw\'eb}{\f1  = Amrod}{\i\f1  (PM:353, 354)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ambarussa}{\f1  "top-russet", alternation of }{\b\f1 Umbarto}{\f1 , mother-name (never used in narrative) of }{\b\f1 Telufinw\'eb}{\f1  = Amras }{\i\f1 (PM:353-354)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ambo}{\f1  "hill", allative pl. }{\b\f1 ambonnar}{\f1  "upon hills" in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 ruxal' ambonnar}{\f1  "upon crumbling hills")
\par }{\b\f1 \tab amil}{\f1  "mother" }{\i\f1 (AM}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 amiless\'eb}{\f1  "mothername" (}{\b\f1 amil}{\f1  "mother" + }{\b\f1 ess\'eb}{\f1  "name"), name given to a child by its mother, sometimes with prophetic implications (}{
\b\f1 amilessi terceny\'eb}{\f1  "mother-names of insight" }{\i\f1 (MR:217)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Amillion}{\f1  "February" }{\i\f1 (LT1:249; LotR-style Quenya has }{\b\i\f1 N\'e9nim\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ammal\'eb}{\f1  "yellow bird, 'yellow hammer' "}{\i\f1  (SMAL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab amm\'eb}{\f1  "mother" }{\i\f1 (AM}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par \tab #}{\b\f1 amorta}{\f1 - "heave"  (literally "up-rise, rise up", cf. }{\b\f1 orta}{\f1 -; the prefix }{\b\f1 am}{\f1 - means "up"). Only attested as a participle}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 amortala}{\f1  "heaving" in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ampa}{\f1  "hook", also name of tengwa 14 }{\i\f1 (GAP, Appendix E)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ampano}{\f1  "building" (especially of wood), "wooden hall" }{\i\f1 (PAN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ampenda}{\f1  "uphill" (adj.) }{\i\f1 (AM}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ampend\'eb}{\f1  "upward slope"}{\i\f1  (PEN/P\'c9NED)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab amu}{\f1  "up, upwards" }{\i\f1 (LT2:335; in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 amba}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab amu}{\f1 - "raise" }{\i\f1 (LT2:335; LotR-style Quenya has }{\b\i\f1 orta}{\i\f1 -)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab amun}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 amund}{\f1 -) "hill" }{\i\f1 (LT2:335; in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 ambo}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab amunt\'eb}{\f1  "sunrise" }{\i\f1 (LT2:335; Tolkien's later Quenya has }{\b\i\f1 anar\'f3r\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab an}{\f1  "for" (}{\i\f1 Nam}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 RGEO:66)}{\f1  - but the }{\b\f1 an}{\f1  of the phrase }{\b\f1 es sorni heruion an!}{\f1  "the Eagles of the Lords are at hand" (SD:290) seems to denote motion towards (th
e speaker): the Eagles are coming. Etym has }{\b\f1 an}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ana}{\f1  "to, towards" }{\i\f1 (N\'c2}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 ).}{\f1  In the "Arctic" sentence, }{\b\f1 an}{\f1  is translated "until".
\par \tab }{\b\f1 an}{\f1 - intensive or superlative prefix, seen in }{\b\f1 ancalima}{\f1  "most bright" (cf. }{\b\f1 calima}{\f1  "bright") }{\i\f1 (Letters:279)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab an}{\f1 - prefix "re" in }{\b\f1 ant\'falien}{\f1 , q.v. }{\i\f1 (LotR-style Quenya shows }{\b\i\f1 en}{\i\f1 - instead.)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ana}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (prefix)}{\f1  "to, towards" }{\i\f1 (N\'c2}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 )}{\b\f1 
\par \tab Anamo}{\f1  "of doom" in }{\b\f1 Rithil-Anamo}{\f1 , q.v. Nominative "doom" = *}{\b\f1 anama}{\f1 ? or *}{\b\f1 anan}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 anam}{\f1 -)?
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ananta}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 a-nanta}{\f1  "and yet, but yet" }{\i\f1 (FS, NDAN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Anar}{\f1  "sun" }{\i\f1 (AN\'c1R, NAR}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 , SA:n\'e1r; UT:22 cf. 51)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 anar}{\f1  "a sun" }{\i\f1 (Markirya)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Anarinya}{\f1  "my Sun" }{\i\f1 (FS)}{\f1 . See also }{\b\f1 \'dar-anar}{\f1 . In }{
\b\f1 An\'e1rion}{\f1  *"Sun-son" and }{\b\f1 Anardil}{\f1  *"Sun-friend", masc. names }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Anarya}{\f1  second day of the Eldarin six-day week, dedicated to the Sun }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Anarr\'edma}{\f1 
 name of a constellation: *"Sun-border"??? }{\i\f1 (Silm; cf. }{\b\i\f1 r\'edma}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab anar\'f3r\'eb}{\f1  "sunrise"}{\i\f1  (ORO)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab anca}{\f1  "jaws, row of teeth" }{\i\f1 (\'c1NAK [there spelt }{\f1 anca}{\i\f1 ], NAK [there spelt}{\f1  anka}{\i\f1 ], Appendix E, SA - despite what Christopher Tolkien says in the entry }{\b\i\f1 anca}{\i\f1  in SA, the Quenya word }{
\b\i\f1 anca}{\i\f1  as such does NOT appear in the Sindarin dragon-name }{\f1 Ancalagon}{\i\f1 , but its Sindarin cognate }{\f1 anc}{\i\f1  does. See \'c1NAK in the Etymologies.) }{\f1 Also name of tengwa 15 }{\i\f1 (Appendix E). }{\f1 
Despite its English gloss, }{\b\f1 anca}{\f1  is a singular word (in Etym the gloss is indeed "jaw", not "jaws").
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ancal\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "radiant one" = Sun}{\i\f1  (KAL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ancalima}{\f1  "most bright, brightest", sc. }{\b\f1 calima}{\f1  "bright" with a superlative or intensive prefix }{\i\f1 (LotR2:IV ch. 9; see Letters:385 for translation)}{\f1 . Fem. name }{\b\f1 Ancalim\'eb}{\f1 
 fem. name, *"Most Bright One", also masc. }{\b\f1 Ancalimon}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 anda}{\f1  "long" (adj.) }{\i\f1 (\'c1NAD/ANDA). }{\f1 In }{\b\f1 Andafangar}{\f1  "Longbeards", one of the tribes of the Dwarves (= Khuzdul }{\i\f1 Sigin-tar\'e2g}{\f1  and Sindarin }{\i\f1 Anfangrim
}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (PM:320)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 andav\'eb}{\f1  "long", as adverb. }{\i\f1 (LotR3:VI ch. 4, translated in Letters:308}{\f1 )
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab andamunda}{\f1  "elephant" ("long-mouth", }{\b\f1 anda}{\f1  + }{\b\f1 munda}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (MBUD)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab andatehta}{\f1  "long-mark" }{\i\f1 (TEK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ando}{\f1  "gate", also name of tengwa 5 }{\i\f1 (AD, Appendix E)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Andolat}{\f1  (hill-name, = S }{\i\f1 Dolad}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (NDOL)}{\b\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab andon}{\f1  "great gate" (}{\b\f1 andond}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 andondi}{\f1 )}{\i\f1  (AD)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab And\'f3r\'eb}{\f1  full form of }{\b\f1 Andor}{\f1 , "land of gift", name of N\'famenor }{\i\f1 (SD:247)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab and\'fan\'eb}{\f1  "sunset, west, evening" }{\i\f1 (ND\'db, Markirya, SA)}{\f1 , also in }{\i\f1 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\f1 : }{\b\f1 And\'fan\'eb}{\f1  "West" (but the standard Quenya translation of "west" is }{\b\f1 N\'famen}{\f1 ) (}{\i\f1 Nam}{
\f1 , }{\i\f1 RGEO:66)}{\f1  Cf. }{\b\f1 andu}{\f1 - in }{\b\f1 And\'fani\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 And\'faril}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab And\'fani\'eb }{\f1 (apparently a variant form of }{\b\f1 and\'fan\'eb}{\f1 ) (place-name, a city and port on the western coast of N\'famenor, said to mean "sunset"). }{\i\f1 (Appendix A}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 Silm, UT:166, ND\'db)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab And\'faril}{\f1  "Flame of the West", sword-name }{\i\f1 (LotR1:II ch. 3)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Andustar}{\f1  the "Westlands" of N\'famenor }{\i\f1 (UT:165)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab aness\'eb}{\f1  "given (or added) name" (encompassing both }{\b\f1 epessi}{\f1  and }{\b\f1 amilessi}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (MR:217)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab anga }{\f1 "iron", also name of tengwa 7 }{\i\f1 (ANG\'c2, Appendix E, SA, PM:347, LT1:249, 268)}{\f1 , masc. name }{\b\f1 Angamait\'eb}{\f1  "Iron-handed" }{\i\f1 (Letters:347)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Angar\'e1to}{\f1  "Iron-champion", Sindarin }{
\i\f1 Angrod}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (SA:ar(a) )}{\f1 . See also }{\b\f1 Angamando}{\f1 . Cf. also }{\b\f1 Angainor}{\f1  the chain with which Melkor was bound }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab angaina}{\f1  "of iron" }{\i\f1 (ANG\'c2)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab angaitya}{\f1  "torment"  }{\i\f1 (LT1:249)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 Angamando}{\f1  "Iron-gaol", Sindarin }{\i\f1 Angband}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (MR:350)}{\f1 . The }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1  gives }{\b\f1 Angamanda}{\f1  "Angband, Hell", lit. "Iron-prison" }{\i\f1 (MBAD)}{\f1 . Older "Qenya" has }{\b\f1 Angamandu}{
\f1  "Hells of Iron" (or pl. }{\b\f1 Angamandi}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (LT1:249)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab angayass\'eb}{\f1  "misery" }{\i\f1 (LT1:249)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ango}{\f1  pl. }{\b\f1 angwi}{\f1  "snake" }{\i\f1 (ANGWA/ANGU)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab angul\'f3k\'eb}{\f1  "dragon" }{\i\f1 (LOK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab anna}{\f1  "gift" }{\i\f1 (ANA}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 , SA)}{\f1 , also name of tengwa 23 }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 ; pl. }{\b\f1 annar}{\f1  "gifts" in }{\i\f1 F\'edriel's Song}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Annatar}{\f1 
 "Lord of Gifts, *Gift-lord", name assumed by Sauron when he tried to seduce the Eldar in the Second Age }{\i\f1 (SA:tar)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab anta}{\f1  "face" }{\i\f1 (ANA}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab anta}{\f1 - "give" }{\i\f1 (ANA}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 , MC:215, 221)}{\f1 . Several occurrences in }{\i\f1 FS: }{\b\f1 antalto}{\i\f1  }{\f1 "they gave"; strangely, no past tense marker seems to be present (cf. -}{\b\f1 lto}{\f1 
 for the ending); }{\b\f1 antar}{\f1  a pl. verb translated "they gave", though in LotR-style Quenya it would rather be the present tense "give" (pl.); }{\b\f1 antar\'f3ta}{\f1  "he gave it" (}{\b\f1 anta-r\'f3-ta}{\f1 
 "gave-he-it"), another verb occurring in }{\i\f1 F\'edriel's Song}{\f1 , once again with no past tense marker. Read something like *}{\b\f1 antan\'e9ros}{\f1  or *}{\b\f1 antaner\'f3ta}{\f1  in Tolkien's later Quenya? Also }{\b\f1 ant\'e1va}{\f1 
 "will give", future tense of }{\b\f1 anta}{\f1 - "give"; read probably *}{\b\f1 antuva}{\f1  in LotR-style Quenya; similarly }{\b\f1 antav\'e1ro}{\f1  "he will give" (LR:63) should rather be *}{\b\f1 antuv\'e1ro}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ant\'eb}{\f1  "giver" (f.) }{\i\f1 (ANA}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab anto}{\f1  (1) "mouth", also name of tengwa 13 }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab anto}{\f1  (2) "giver" (m.)}{\i\f1  (ANA}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 )
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 antoryam\'eb}{\f1  "strengthening", used of various manipulations of a stem, such as lengthening vowels or consonants or turning a consonant or a vowel into a "blend" (see }{\i\f1 ostim\'eb}{\f1 ) }{
\i\f1 (VT39:9)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab ant\'falien}{\f1  "hath returned" in the phrase }{\b\f1 I.cal' ant\'falien}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "Light hath returned" }{\i\f1 (LT1:270)}{\f1 ; note the "Qenya" third person ending -}{
\b\f1 n}{\f1 . In LotR-style Quenya this would perhaps read *}{\b\f1 i c\'e1l' enut\'fali\'eb}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab anwa}{\f1  "real, actual, true" }{\i\f1 (ANA}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab anw\'eb}{\f1  archaic past tense of }{\b\f1 auta}{\f1 -, q.v. }{\i\f1 (WJ:366)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab apa}{\f1 - "after", only attested as a prefix in }{\b\f1 apaceny\'eb}{\f1  and }{\b\f1 Apan\'f3nar}{\f1 , q.v. Variant }{\b\f1 ep}{\f1 - in }{\b\f1 epess\'eb}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab apaceny\'eb}{\f1  is translated "foresight" in MR:216; yet the context and the form of the word itself clearly indicates that it is actually the pl. form of an adjective *}{\b\f1 apacenya }{\f1 
"of foresight". The noun "foresight" is almost certainly *}{\b\f1 apacen}{\f1 ; cf. }{\b\f1 tercen }{\f1 "insight". }{\i\f1 (MR:216)}{\f1  The literal meaning of *}{\b\f1 apacen}{\f1  is *"aftersight", sc. knowledge of that which comes after. [}{\b\f1 
Essi}{\f1 ] }{\b\f1 apaceny\'eb}{\f1  "[names] of foresight", prophetic names given to a child by its mother }{\i\f1 (MR:216)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 apair\'eb}{\f1  "victory" }{\i\f1 (GL:17)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Apan\'f3nar}{\f1  "the After-born", an Elvish name of Mortal Men as the Second-born of Il\'favatar }{\i\f1 (WJ:387)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab apsa}{\f1  "cooked food, meat"}{\i\f1  (AP)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab aqua}{\f1  "fully, completely, altogether, wholly" }{\i\f1 (WJ:392)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 aquapahti\'eb}{\f1  "privacy" (literally *"fully-closedness", of a mind that closes itself against telepathic transfers) }{\i\f1 (VT39:23)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab ar}{\f1  (1) "and" }{\i\f1 (AR}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 , SA}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 FS}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 Nam, RGEO:67, CO}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 LR:47, 56, MC:216)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 ar}{\f1  (2) "day", apparently short for }{\b\f1 \'e1r\'eb}{\f1 , in the names of the Valinorean week listed below.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ar Fanturion}{\f1  *"Day of the Fanturi (Mandos and Lorien)" }{\i\f1 (LEP/LEPEN/LEPEK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ar Manwen}{\f1  *"Day of Manwe" }{\i\f1 (LEP/LEPEN/LEPEK; this is "Qenya" with genitive in -}{\b\i\f1 n}{\i\f1 .)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ar Ulmon}{\f1  *"Day of Ulmo" }{\i\f1 (LEP/LEPEN/LEPEK; this is "Qenya" with genitive in -}{\b\i\f1 n}{\i\f1 .)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ar Veruen}{\f1  *"Day of the Spouses" (Aule and Yavanna) }{\i\f1 (LEP/LEPEN/LEPEK; this is "Qenya" with genitive in -}{\b\i\f1 n}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 ar}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (prefix)}{\f1  "outside" }{\i\f1 (AR}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 ,}{ element meaning "beside" }{\i (VT42:17)}{\i\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab \'e1ra}{\f1  "dawn" }{\i\f1 (AR}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ara}{\f1  "outside, beside" }{\i\f1 (AR}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ara}{\f1 -, }{\b\f1 ar}{\f1 - a prefixed form of the stem }{\b\f1 Ara}{\f1 - "noble" }{\i\f1 (PM:344)}{\f1 . In }{\b\f1 Arac\'e1no}{\f1  "high chieftain", mothername }{\i\f1 (amiless\'eb}{\f1 , q.v.) of Fingolfin }{\i\f1 (PM:360, cf. 344)}{
\f1 , }{\b\f1 Arafinw\'eb }{\f1 "Finarfin" }{\i\f1 (MR:230)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Araman}{\f1  "outside Aman", name of a region }{\i\f1 (SA:ar, m\'e2n)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab aran}{\f1  "king"; pl. }{\b\f1 arani}{\i\f1  (WJ:369)}{\f1 ; gen.pl. }{\b\f1 aranion}{\f1  "of kings" in }{\b\f1 as\'eba aranion}{\f1 , q.v.; }{\b\f1 aranya}{\f1  *"my king" (}{\b\f1 aran}{\f1  + }{\b\f1 nya}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (UT:193)}{\f1 . }{
\b\f1 Aran Meletyalda}{\f1  "king your mighty" = "your majesty" }{\i\f1 (WJ:369)}{\f1 . Also in }{\b\f1 arandil}{\f1  "king's friend, royalist", }{\b\f1 arandur}{\f1  "king's servant, minister" }{\i\f1 (Letters:386)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Arantar}{\f1 
 masc. name, *"King-Lord" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Arandor}{\f1  "Kingsland" }{\i\f1 (UT:165)}{\f1 . Other}{\i\f1  }{\f1 compounds }{\b\f1 ingaran}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Nold\'f3ran}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 N\'faaran}{\f1 , q.v.
\par \tab }{\b\f1 aranel}{\f1  "princess" (perhaps *}{\b\f1 aranell}{\f1 -) }{\i\f1 (UT:434)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Aranw\'eb}{\f1  *"Kingly Person", masc. name }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Aratan}{\f1  *"Noble Adan", masc. name }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Aratar}{\f1  "the Supreme", the chief Valar, translation of the foreign word }{\b\f1 M\'e1hani}{\f1  adopted and adapted from Valarin }{\i\f1 (WJ:402)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Aratarya}{\f1  "her sublimity"; }{\b\f1 Varda Aratarya}{\f1 
 "Varda the lofty, Varda in her sublimity" }{\i\f1 (WJ:369)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ar\'e1to}{\f1  "champion, eminent man" }{\i\f1 (SA:ar(a) )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab arauca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "swift, rushing" }{\i\f1 (LT2:347)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab arauc\'eb}{\f1  "demon" }{\i\f1 (LT1:250, in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 rauco}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Arciryas}{\f1  masc. name (evidently derived from *}{\b\f1 arcirya}{\f1  "royal ship") }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab arda}{\f1  "realm" }{\i\f1 (GAR under 3AR)}{\f1 . It is said that }{\b\f1 arda}{\f1 , when used as a common noun, "meant any more or less bounded or defined place, a region" }{\i\f1 (WJ:402)}{\f1 , or "a particular land or region" (}{\i\f1 
WJ:413)}{\f1 .  Capitalized }{\b\f1 Arda}{\f1  "the Realm", name of the Earth as the kingdom of Manw\'eb }{\i\f1 (Silm}{\f1 ), "the name given to our world or earth...within the immensity of E\'e4"}{\i\f1  }{\f1 (}{\i\f1 Letters:}{\f1 283),}{\b\f1  }{\f1 
once translated "Earth" }{\i\f1 (SD:246)}{\f1 . Also name of tengwa 26 }{\i\f1 (Appendix E).}{\f1  Masc. name }{\b\f1 Ardam\'edr\'eb}{\f1  "Jewel of the World" }{\i\f1 (PM:348)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'e1r\'eb}{\f1  "day" }{\i\f1 (PM:127)}{\f1  or "sunlight" }{\i\f1 (SA:arien). }{\f1 Also name of tengwa 31; cf. also }{\b\f1 ar}{\f1  # 2. Originally pronounced }{\b\f1 \'e1z\'eb}{\f1 
; when /z/ merged with /r/, the letter became superfluous and was given the new value }{\b\f1 ss}{\f1 , hence it was re-named }{\b\f1 ess\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 . Also }{\b\f1 \'e1r\'eb nuquerna}{\f1  *"}{\i\f1 \'e1r\'eb}{\f1 
 reversed", name of tengwa 32, similar to normal }{\b\f1 \'e1r\'eb}{\f1  but turned upside down }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 . -In the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1 , this word has a short vowel: }{\b\f1 ar\'eb}{\f1  pl. }{\b\f1 ari}{\i\f1  (AR}{\i\f1\super 1}{
\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Arfanyaras}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Arfanyarass\'eb}{\f1  a "variant or close equivalent" of }{\b\f1 Taniquetil}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ:403)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ari\'eb}{\f1  "daytime" }{\i\f1 (AR}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Arien}{\f1  "the Sun-maiden", fem. name, the Maia of the Sun }{\i\f1 (AR}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 ; Silm)}{\f1 ; cf. }{\b\f1 \'e1r\'eb}{\f1  "sunlight"
\par }{\b\f1 \tab arin}{\f1  "morning"}{\i\f1  (AR}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab arinya}{\f1  "morning (adj.), early"}{\i\f1  (AR}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab armar}{\f1  "goods" (pl.) }{\i\f1 (3AR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Armenelos}{\f1  City of the Kings in N\'famenor (}{\b\f1 ar-menel-os}{\f1 (}{\b\f1 to}{\f1 ) "royal-heaven-city"???)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Arnan\'f3r\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Arnanor}{\f1  "Arnor", Royal Land (so #}{\b\f1 arna}{\f1  = "royal"?) }{\i\f1 (Letters:428)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab arquen}{\f1  "a noble" }{\i\f1 (WJ:372)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab arta}{\f1  (1) adj. "exalted, lofty" }{\i\f1 (PM:354)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab arta}{\f1  (2) noun "fort, fortress" }{\i\f1 (GARAT under 3AR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab arta}{\f1  (3) prep. "across, athwart" }{\i\f1 (LT2:335)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Artaher}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 Artah\'e9r}{\f1 -) "noble lord", masc. name (Sindarin }{\i\f1 Arothir}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (PM:346)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Artamir}{\f1  "Noble jewel", masc. name }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab artuil\'eb}{\f1  "dayspring, early morn"}{\i\f1  (TUY)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Arvalin}{\f1  "outside Valinor"}{\i\f1  (AR}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Arveruen}{\f1  third day of the Valinorian week of 5 days, dedicated to Aule and Yavanna}{\i\f1  (BES)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab arwa}{\f1  "in control of, possessing" (+ genitive), also suffix -}{\b\f1 arwa}{\i\f1  }{\f1 "having", as in }{\b\f1 aldarwa}{\f1  "having trees, tree-grown" }{\i\f1 (3AR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab arya}{\f1  "twelve hours, day" }{\i\f1 (AR}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 ) 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Aryant\'eb}{\f1  "Daybringer" }{\i\f1 (AR}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 , ANA}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab aryon}{\f1  "heir"}{\i\f1  (GAR under 3AR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab asar}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) (Vanyarin }{\b\f1 athar}{\f1 ) "fixed time, festival". Adopted and adapted from Valarin. }{\i\f1 (WJ:399)}{\f1  Pl. }{\b\f1 asari}{\f1  is attested }{\i\f1 (VT39:31)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab as\'eba aranion}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "kingsfoil, athelas"; lit. "}{\i\f1 as\'eba}{\f1  [foil?] of kings", see }{\b\f1 aran}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (LotR3:V ch. 8)}{\f1 
\par \tab #}{\b\f1 ascat}{\f1 - "break asunder", only attested in the past tense: }{\b\f1 ascant\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (SD:310)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab assari }{\f1 "bones" (?) }{\i\f1 (MC:214; this is "Qenya") }{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 asta}{\f1  "month", }{a division of the year }{\i (VT42:20)}{\f1 . Pl. }{\b\f1 astar}{\f1  is attested }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Astaldo}{\f1  "the Valiant", a title of Tulkas }{\i\f1 (Silm, MR:438)}{\f1 ; replaced }{\b\f1 Pold\'f3r\'eba}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab asto}{\f1  "dust" }{\i\f1 (\'c1S-AT)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ata}{\f1  "again", also prefix }{\b\f1 ata}{\f1 -, }{\b\f1 at}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (prefix)}{\f1  "back, again, re-"}{\i\f1  (AT(AT) )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Atalant\'eb}{\f1  "the Fallen" (name), "downfall, overthrow, especially as name of the land of N\'famenor" }{\i\f1 (DAT/DANT, TAL\'c1T, Akallab\'eath, SD:247, 310; also LR:47)}{\f1 . Variant }{\b\f1 atalanti\'eb}{\f1 
 "Downfall", said to be a normal noun-formation in Quenya }{\i\f1 (Letters:347)}{\f1 . Also common noun }{\b\f1 atalant\'eb}{\f1  "collapse, downfall", from which noun is derived the adjective }{\b\f1 atalant\'eba}{\f1  "ruinous, downfallen", pl. }{\b\f1 
atalanti\'eb}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1  (changed to sg. }{\b\f1 atalant\'eba}{\f1  - this change does not make sense, since the adjective undoubtedly modifies a plural noun). }{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab atalta}{\f1  "collapse, fall in"}{\i\f1  (TAL\'c1T)}{\f1 , pa.t. }{\b\f1 ataltan\'eb}{\f1  "down-fell, fell down" in LR:47 and SD:247; }{\b\f1 atalant\'eb}{\f1  "down-fell" in LR:56}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Atan}{\f1  pl. }{\b\f1 Atani}{\f1  "the Second Folk", an Elvish name of Mortal Men, the Second-born of Il\'favatar. Cf. also }{\b\f1 N\'fanatani}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ:386)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Atanamir}{\f1  masc.name, *"Edain-jewel"? }{\i\f1 
(Appendix A)}{\f1 . \tab }{\b\f1 Atanatar}{\f1  masc. name, "Father of Men" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 , also common noun }{\b\f1 atanatar}{\f1 , pl. }{\b\f1 Atanat\'e1ri}{\f1 
, "Fathers of Men", a title that "properly belonged only to the leaders and chieftains of the peoples at the time of their entry into Beleriand" }{\i\f1 (PM:324, SA:atar)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b atatya}{ "double" (verb or adj.?) }{\i (VT42:26)}{\i\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab ataqu\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "construction, building" }{\i\f1 (TAK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab atar}{\f1  "father" }{\i\f1 (SA; WJ:402, UT:193, LT1:255)}{\f1 . According to the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1  (}{\i\f1 ATA}{\f1 ) the pl. is }{\b\f1 atari}{\f1 , but contrast #}{\b\f1 at\'e1ri}{\f1  in }{\b\f1 Atanat\'e1ri}{\f1 
 "Fathers of Men" (q.v.) }{\b\f1 Atarinya}{\f1  "my father" }{\i\f1 (LR:70)}{\f1 . Diminutive }{\b\f1 Atarinc\'eb}{\i\f1  ("k")}{\f1  "Little father", mother-name (never used in narrative) of }{\b\f1 Curufinw\'eb}{\f1  = Curufin }{\i\f1 (PM:353). }{\f1 

\par }{\b\f1 \tab atend\'eba}{\f1  "double-middle", name of the two }{\b\f1 enderi}{\f1  or middle-days that occurred in leap-years according to the calendar of Imladris }{\i\f1 (Appendix D, first edition of LotR)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 atsa}{\f1  "catch, hook, claw"}{\i\f1  (GAT)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab atta}{\f1  (1) "two" }{\i\f1 (AT(AT), Letters:427, }{\i VT42:26, 27}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Attalyar}{\f1  "Bipeds" (sg. *}{\b\f1 Attalya}{\f1 ) = Petty-dwarves (from Sindarin }{\i\f1 Tad-dail}{\f1 ) }
{\i\f1 (WJ:389). A word }{\b\i\f1 atta}{\i\f1  "again" was struck out; see the entry }{\f1 TAT }{\i\f1 in Etym and cf. }{\b\i\f1 ata}{\i\f1  in this list.}{\f1 
\par \tab [}{\b\f1 atta}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (prefix)}{\f1  (2) "back again, re-" }{\i\f1 (TAT)}{\f1 ] 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b att\'eba}{ ordinal "second", replacing the archaic form }{\b tatya}{ }{\i (VT42:25)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab atto}{\f1  "father" (hypocoristic, = *"dad") }{\i\f1 (ATA, LR:49)}{\f1 
\par \tab #}{\b\f1 atya}{\f1  "second" in }{\b\f1 Atyarussa}{\f1  "Second }{\i\f1 russa}{\f1 " }{\i\f1 (VT41:10)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab atwa}{\f1  "double" }{\i\f1 (AT(AT) )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab au}{\f1 - (1) a verbal prefix "off, *away", as in }{\b\f1 auciri}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "cut off" (so as to get rid of or lose a portion); contrast }{\b\f1 h\'f3ciri}{\i\f1  (WJ:366, 368)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab au}{\f1 - (2) privative prefix, = "without" }{\i\f1 (AWA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab aul\'eb}{\f1  (1) "invention" }{\i\f1 (GAWA/GOWO)}{\f1 ; evidently connected to or associated with }{\b\f1 Aul\'eb}{\f1 , name of the Vala of craft }{\i\f1 (GAWA/GOWO, TAN)}{\f1 ; adopted and adapted from Valarin }{\i\f1 (WJ:399)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 aul\'eb}{\f1  (2) "shaggy" (}{\i\f1 LT1:249; this "Qenya" word may have been obsoleted by # 1 above)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 Aulendur}{\f1  "Servant of Aul\'eb", applied especially to those persons, or families, among the Noldor who actually entered Aul\'eb's service and in return received instruction from him }{\i\f1 (PM:366)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 Aul\'ebonnar}{\f1  (sg. #}{\b\f1 Aul\'ebonna}{\f1 ) "Children of Aul\'eb", a name of the Dwarves }{\i\f1 (PM:391)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab aur\'eb}{\f1  "sunlight, day" }{\i\f1 (SA:ur)}{\f1 , locative }{\b\f1 auress\'eb}{\f1  "in (the) morning" in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Aurel}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 Aureld}{\f1 -, e.g. pl. }{\b\f1 Aureldi}{\f1 ) = }{\b\f1 Oarel}{\f1 , q.v. "Elf who departed from Beleriand to Aman" (while the }{\i\f1 Sindar }{\f1 stayed there) }{\i\f1 (WJ:363)}{\f1 . Earlier }{\b\f1 Auzel}{\f1 .

\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b ausa}{ (}{\b \'fe}{) "a dim shape, spectral or vague apparition" }{\i (VT42:10, cf. 9)}{\i\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab ausi\'eb}{\f1  "wealth" }{\i\f1 (LT2:336)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab auta}{\f1 - (1) "go away, leave" (leave the point of the speaker's thought); old "strong" past tense }{\b\f1 anw\'eb}{\f1 , usually replaced by }{\b\f1 v\'e1n\'eb}{\f1 , perfect }{\b\f1 av\'e1ni\'eb}{\f1  \endash 
 but when the meaning is purely physical "went away (to another place)" rather than "disappear", the past tense }{\b\f1 oant\'eb}{\f1 , perfect }{\b\f1 oanti\'eb}{\f1  was used. Past participle }{\b\f1 vanwa}{\f1 
 "gone, lost, no longer to be had, vanished, departed, dead, past and over" }{\i\f1 (WJ:366)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab auta}{\f1 - (2) "invent, originate, devise" }{\i\f1 (GAWA/GOWO)}{\f1  Obsoleted by # 1 above?
\par }{\b\f1 \tab aut\'eb}{\f1  "prosperity, wealth", also adj. "rich" }{\i\f1 (LT2:336)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Auzel }{\f1 pl. }{\b\f1 Auzeldi}{\f1  Vanyarin form (and original form) of }{\b\f1 Aureldi}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ:374)}{\f1 ; see }{\b\f1 Aurel}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'e1va}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 av\'e1}{\f1  (the latter stressed on the final syllable) "Don't!"; }{\b\f1 \'e1van}{\f1  "I won't" (also }{\b\f1 v\'e1n}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 v\'e1ny\'eb}{\f1 ); }{\b\f1 \'e1va car\'eb!}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "don't do it!" 
}{\i\f1 (WJ:371)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ava}{\f1  (1) "outside" }{\i\f1 (AWA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ava}{\f1 - (2) prefix indicating something forbidden: }{\b\f1 avaqu\'e9tima}{\f1  "not to be said, that must not be said", }{\b\f1 avany\'e1rima}{\f1  "not to be told or related" }{\i\f1 (WJ:370)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 ava}{\f1 - (3) }{\i\f1 (prefix)}{\f1  "without"}{\i\f1  (AR}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 , AWA)}{\f1 . In some cases apparently used as a mere negation prefix: The form }{\b\f1 avalerya}{\f1 
 in VT41:6 is seemingly a negated form of the verb }{\b\f1 lerya}{\f1 - "release, set free"; the verb }{\b\f1 avalerya}{\f1 - is suggested to have the same meaning as the root }{\i\f1 KHAP}{\f1  = "bind, make
 fast, restrain, deprive of liberty". Likewise, }{\b\f1 avalatya}{\f1 - from the same source seems to mean "close, shut", this being a negated form of a verb *}{\b\f1 latya}{\f1 - "open" (q.v.)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab ava}{\f1 - (4) pa.t. }{\b\f1 avan\'eb}{\f1 , a verb that is not clearly glossed; apparently meaning }{\i\f1 refuse}{\f1  or }{\i\f1 prohibit}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ:370)}{\f1 . Cf. }{\b\f1 \'e1va}{\f1 , }{
\b\f1 Avamanyar}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Avac\'fama}{\f1  "Exterior Void beyond the World" }{\i\f1 (AWA, (OY) )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab avahaira}{\f1  "remote, far" (adj.) }{\i\f1 (KHAYA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Avall\'f3n\'eb}{\f1  Haven and city on Tol Eress\'eba. In the }{\i\f1 Akallab\'eath}{\f1  the city is said to be so named because it is "of all cities the nearest to Valinor", but the etymology is not further explained. The }{\i\f1 
Etymologies}{\f1  gives }{\b\f1 Aval\'f3na}{\f1  "the outer isle" = Tol Eress\'eba }{\i\f1 (LONO, (AWA) )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Avamanyar}{\f1  Elves that refused to go to Aman (= }{\b\f1 Avari}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (WJ:370)}{\f1 . Sg. #}{\b\f1 Avamanya}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab av\'e1ni\'eb}{\f1 , pl. }{\b\f1 av\'e1nier}{\f1  perfect tense of }{\b\f1 auta}{\f1 -, q.v. }{\i\f1 (WJ:366)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 avanir}{\f1  "unwill" }{\i\f1 (VT39:23)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab avan\'f3t\'eb}{\f1  "without number, numberless" }{\i\f1 (AWA, AR}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 avany\'e1rima}{\f1  "not to be told or related" }{\i\f1 (WJ:370)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab avaquet}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "refuse, forbid" }{\i\f1 (KWET)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab avaqu\'e9tima}{\f1  "not to be said, that must not be said" }{\i\f1 (WJ:370)}{\b\f1 \tab 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 avar}{\f1  "recusant, one who refuses to act as advised or commanded"; pl. }{\b\f1 Avari}{\f1  Elves that refused to join in the westward march to Aman }{\i\f1 (WJ:371, singular }{\b\i\f1 Avar}{\i\f1 
 in WJ:377) }{\f1 The }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1  gives }{\b\f1 Avar}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Avaro}{\f1  pl. }{\b\f1 Avari}{\f1   "Elves who never left Middle-earth or began the march" }{\i\f1 (AB/ABAR)
\par }{\b\f1 Avathar}{\f1  name of the land between the southern Pel\'f3
ri and the Sea, where Ungoliant dwelt; said to be "not Elvish" in WJ:404 and must be thought of as an adaption from Valarin; on the other hand, MR:284 states that it is "ancient Quenya" and offer
s the interpretation "The Shadows". Whatever the case, it must have become *}{\b\f1 Avasar}{\f1  in Exilic Quenya.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab avestalis}{\f1  "January" }{\i\f1 (LT1:252; LotR-style Quenya has }{\b\i\f1 Narviny\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab axa}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("ks")}{\f1  (1) "narrow path, ravine" }{\i\f1 (AK)
\par \tab }{\b\f1 axa}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("ks")}{\f1  (2) "waterfall"}{\i\f1  (LT1:249, 255 - this "Qenya" word may have been obsoleted by # 1 above) }{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab axan}{\f1  "law, rule, commandment". Adopted and adapted from Valarin. }{\i\f1 (WJ:399)}{\f1  Pl. }{\b\f1 axani}{\f1  is attested }{\i\f1 (VT39:23, defined as "laws, rules, as primarily proceeding from Eru" in VT39:30)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab axo}{\f1  "bone"; pl. }{\b\f1 axor}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 Markirya
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'e1ya}{\f1  "awe" }{\i\f1 (PM:363)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'e1z\'eb}{\f1  see }{\b\f1 \'e1r\'eb
\par 
\par }{\f1 <C>
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab c\'e1}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k\'e2")}{\f1  "jaw" }{\i\f1 (GL:37; later sources give }{\b\i\f1 anca}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 caila}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "lying in bed, sickness"}{\i\f1  (KAY)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab caima}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "bed" }{\i\f1 (KAY)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab caimasan}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "bedchamber" (}{\b\f1 caimasamb}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 caimasambi}{\f1 )}{\i\f1  (STAB)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab caimass\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "lying in bed }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1 , sickness" }{\i\f1 (KAY) 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab caimass\'eba}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "bedridden, sick" }{\i\f1 (KAY)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab cainen}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "ten" }{\i\f1 (KAYAN/KAYAR)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab cair\'eb }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "lay" (pa.t. of "lie") }{\i\f1 (MC:221; this is "Qenya" - in LotR-style Quenya *}{\b\i\f1 caitan\'eb}{\i\f1  pa.t. of }{\b\i\f1 caita}{\i\f1 ?)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab caita}{\f1  "lie", also present tense "lies". }{\b\f1 Sindan\'f3riello caita morni\'eb}{\f1  "out of a grey land darkness lies". }{\i\f1 (Nam, RGEO:67)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab caivo }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "corpse" }{\i\f1 (MC:221; Tolkien's later Quenya has }{\b\i\f1 loico}{\i\f1  or }{\b\i\f1 quelet}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 caivo-calma}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "corpse-light" = corpsecandle }{\i\f1 (MC:214; this is "Qenya": Tolkien's later Quenya has }{\b\i\f1 loicol\'edcuma}{\i\f1 )}{\b\f1 
\par \tab cal}{\f1 - "shine", future tense }{\b\f1 caluva }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "shall shine" }{\i\f1 (UT:22 cf. 51). }{\f1 Compare also early "Qenya" }{\b\f1 cala}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "shine" }{\i\f1 (LT1:254)}{\f1  
\par }{\b\f1 \tab cala}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "light" }{\i\f1 (noun, KAL}{\f1 ). Concerning the "Qenya" verb }{\b\f1 cala}{\f1 -, see }{\b\f1 cal}{\f1  above.}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Calacilya}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "Pass of Light", in which K\'f4r was built }{\i\f1 (KIL, KAL)}{\f1 . Evidently a variant of }{\b\f1 Calacirya}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Calacirya}{\f1  "Light-cleft", Calacirya, the great ravine in the mountains of Valinor, the passage leading from Valmar to the region where the Teleri lived. Genitive }{\b\f1 Calaciryo}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
(Nam, RGEO:67)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Calaciryan}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "the Cleft of Light", the pass in the Pel\'f3ri, apparently a variant of }{\b\f1 Calacirya}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ:403, SA:kal-, kir-). }{\b\f1 Calaciryan}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Calaciryand\'eb}{\f1 , "the region of }{
\i\f1 Eldamar}{\f1  (Elvenhome) in and near the entrance to the ravine, where the Light was brighter and the land more beautiful" }{\i\f1 (RGEO:70)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Calainis}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "May" }{\i\f1 (LT1:252, 254; in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 L\'f3tess\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Calamando}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "Light Mando" = Manw\'eb }{\i\f1 (MBAD, (KAL, MANAD) )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Calamor}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  (Q? - not Sindarin!) *"Light-Ones" = Light-Elves? Sg. *}{\b\f1 Calamo}{\i\f1  (KAL)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 calass\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "clarity, brilliance" }{\i\f1 (GL:39)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Calaquendi}{\f1  "Elves of the Light, Light-elves" }{\i\f1 (SA:kal-, SA:quen-/quet-, WJ:361, WJ:373)}{\f1 ; spelt }{\i\f1 Kalaqendi}{\f1  in Etym }{\i\f1 (KAL)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 calarus}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 calarust}{\f1 -) "polished copper" }{\i\f1 (VT41:10)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Calav\'e9n\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "Sun" (lit. *"light-vessel", *"light-dish") }{\i\f1 (LT1:254)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Calavent\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "Sun" }{\i\f1 (LT1:254)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab c\'e1l\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "light" (}{\i\f1 Markirya; in early "Qenya", }{\b\i\f1 c\'e1l\'eb}{\i\f1  meant "morning", LT1:254)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab calima}{\f1  "bright" }{\i\f1 (VT42:32)}{\f1 ; cf. }{\b\f1 ancalima
\par \tab Calimehtar}{\f1  masc.name, *"Bright Swordsman" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Calimmacil}{\f1  masc. name, *"Bright Sword" (for *}{\b\f1 Calimamacil}{\f1 ?) }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab calina}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "light" (adj.) }{\i\f1 (KAL)}{\f1 , "bright" }{\i\f1 (VT42:32)}{\f1  - but apparently a noun "light" in }{\b\f1 coacalina}{\f1 , q.v.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Calion}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 Tar-Calion}{\f1 , the Quenya name of King Ar-Pharaz\'f4n "the Golden"; }{\b\f1 Calion}{\f1  would seem to be connected to }{\b\f1 cal}{\f1 - "shine", }{\b\f1 c\'e1l\'eb}{\f1  "light". }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab calli\'e9r\'eb}{\f1  "shone" }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (MC:220; this is "Qenya" - in LotR-style Quenya *}{\b\i\f1 call\'eb}{\i\f1 , *}{\b\i\f1 caltan\'eb}{\i\f1 .)}{\b\f1 
\par \tab callo}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "noble man, hero" }{\i\f1 (KAL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab calma}{\f1  "lamp, a light", also name of tengwa 3 }{\i\f1 (Appendix E, KAL)}{\f1 . In early "Qenya", }{\b\f1 calma}{\i\f1  ("k")}{\f1  meant}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "daylight" }{\i\f1 (LT1:254; in MC:213, the word is translated "light").}{\b\f1  }{
\f1 Plural instrumental }{\b\f1 calmainen}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "lights-by", by lights }{\i\f1 (MC:216)}{\b\f1 
\par \tab Calmacil}{\f1  masc. name, *"Light-sword" or possibly (if haplology of *}{\b\f1 Calmamacil}{\f1 ) *"Lamp-sword" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 . Cf. }{\b\f1 c\'e1l\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 cala}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 calma}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 macil}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab calmat\'e9ma}{\f1  "}{\i\f1 k}{\f1 -series", velar series: the third column of the Tengwar system }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab calpa}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "water-vessel"; verb }{\b\f1 calpa}{\f1 - "draw water, scoop out, bale out" }{\i\f1 (KALPA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab calta}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "shine"}{\i\f1  (KAL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab calwa}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "beautiful" }{\i\f1 (LT1:254)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab calya}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "illuminate" }{\i\f1 (KAL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab camb\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "hollow (of hand)"}{\i\f1  (KAB)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab can}{\f1 - (1) }{\i\f1 (prefix)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "four"}{\i\f1  (K\'c1NAT)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab can}{\f1 - (2) verb "command, order" (give an order) or (with things as object) "demand" }{\i\f1 (PM:361-362; only the stem KAN is there mentioned \endash  not the same stem KAN as in the }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1 )}{\b\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Canafinw\'eb}{\f1  "strong-voiced or ?commanding Finw\'eb", masc. name; his Sindarin name was }{\i\f1 Maglor}{\f1  (see }{\b\f1 Macalaur\'eb}{\f1 ). Short Quenya name }{\b\f1 C\'e1no}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (PM:352).
\par }{\b\f1 \tab c\'e1n\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "valour"}{\i\f1  (KAN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab c\'e1no}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "commander", usually as the title of a lesser chief, especially one acting as the deputy of one higher in rank }{\i\f1 (PM:345, SA:k\'e1no - PM:362 indicates that }{\b\i\f1 c\'e1no}{\i\f1 
 originially meant "crier, herald")}{\f1 ; "ruler, governor, chieftain" }{\i\f1 (UT:400)}{\b\f1  }{\f1 Masc. name }{\b\f1 C\'e1no}{\f1 , see }{\b\f1 Canafinw\'eb
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 canta}{\f1  (1) }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  }{cardinal "four" }{\i (K\'c1NAT, VT42:24)}{; }{\b cant\'eba}{ }{\i ("k")}{ ordinal "fourth" }{\i (VT42:25)}{\i\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab canta}{\f1  (2) }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "shaped", also as quasi-suffix -}{\b\i\f1 canta}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "-shaped" }{\i\f1 (KAT)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 cant\'eba}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{ "fourth" }{\i (VT42:25)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab canuva}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "leaden" }{\i\f1 (LT1:268; if this "Qenya" word is used in a LotR-style Quenya context, it must not be confused with the future tense of }{\b\i\f1 can}{\i\f1 -)
}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab canwa}{\f1  "announcement, order" }{\i\f1 (PM:362)}{\b\f1 
\par \tab canya}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "bold" }{\i\f1 (KAN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab capalinda}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "spring of water" }{\i\f1 (LT1:257; }{\b\i\f1 ehtel\'eb}{\i\f1  is to be preferred in LotR-style Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab car}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 card}{\f1 -) }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "deed" (rewritten >) "building, house" }{\i\f1 (KAR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab c\'e1r}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 cas}{\f1 -) }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "head" }{\i\f1 (KAS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab car}{\f1 - "make, do, build" (1st pers. aorist }{\b\f1 carin}{\f1  "I make, build"), pa.t. }{\b\f1 carn\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (KAR)}{\f1 ; stem }{\b\f1 car\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  in the phrase }{\b\f1 \'e1va car\'eb}{\f1  "don't do it" }{
\i\f1 (WJ:371)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 carir}{\f1  "form", aorist pl. in the phrase }{\b\f1 i carir quettar}{\f1  "those who form words" }{\i\f1 (WJ:391)}{\f1 , }{\b carita}{ }{\i ("k")}{, infinitive/gerund "to do" or "doing" }{\i (VT42:33)}{, }{\f1 with suffixes 
}{\b\f1 caritas}{\f1  "to do it" or "doing it", }{\b\f1 caritalya(s)}{\f1  "your doing (it)" in VT41:13,17, VT42:33. Past participle }{\b\f1 carna}{\f1 , q.v. Some doubtful forms in }{\i\f1 F\'edriel's Song:}{\f1  past tense }{\b\f1 c\'e1r\'eb}{\f1  }{
\i\f1 ("k\'e1re")}{\f1  "made"; the form }{\b\f1 carn\'eb}{\f1  (LR:362) is probably to be preferred in LotR-style Quenya. Also *}{\b\f1 c\'e1ri\'eb}{\f1  with various suffixes: }{\b\f1 c\'e1rier}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k\'e1rier")}{\f1 
 is translated "they made"; actually it seems to be an augmentless perfect *"they have made", "they" being simply the plural ending -}{\b\f1 r}{\f1 . The literal meaning of }{\b\f1 c\'e1rielto}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  must also be *"they made" (cf. -}{
\b\f1 lto}{\f1 ).
\par }{\b\f1 \tab carax\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k, ks")}{\f1  "jagged hedge of spikes" }{\i\f1 (KARAK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab carca}{\f1  "tooth" }{\i\f1 (KARAK)}{\f1  or "fang" }{\i\f1 (SA:carak-)}{\f1 . When referring to a normal tooth, not necessarily sharp, the word }{\b\f1 nelet}{\f1  is probably to be preferred. - Cf. also pl. }{\b\f1 carcar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
("karkar") }{\f1 in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 , there translated "rocks", evidently referring to sharp rocks. Already the early "Qenya Lexicon" has }{\b\f1 carca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "fang, tooth, tusk" }{\i\f1 (LT2:344)}{\f1 . Collective }{
\b\f1 carcan\'eb}{\f1 , q.v.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab carcan\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "row of teeth" }{\i\f1 (KARAK; this may be a misreading for *}{\b\i\f1 carcar\'eb}{\i\f1 ). In early "Qenya", }{\b\i\f1 carcan\'eb}{\i\f1  meant "snarling", adj. (MC:213)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab carcaras}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 carcass\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "row of spikes or teeth" }{\i\f1 (LT2:344 - Tolkien's later Quenya has }{\b\i\f1 carcan\'eb}{\i\f1 , but these words, especially }{\b\i\f1 carcass\'eb}{\i\f1 
, may still be valid)}{\f1 
\par \tab [}{\b\f1 carco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "crow" }{\i\f1 (KARKA)}{\f1 ] }{\i\f1 (Changed to }{\b\i\f1 corco}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 carma}{\f1  "helm" (helmet) in }{\b\f1 Carma-cundo}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "Helm-guardian" }{\i\f1 (PM:260)}{\f1 . Cf. }{\b\f1 cassa}{\f1  in Etym.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Carm\'eb}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "art" }{\i\f1 (UT:459)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab carna}{\f1  *"built, made" in }{\b\f1 Vincarna}{\f1  "newly-made" }{\i\f1 (MR:408)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Carna}{\f1  would seem to be the past participle of }{\b\f1 car}{\f1 -.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab carn\'eb}{\f1  "red" }{\i\f1 (SA:caran, MC:214, KAR\'c1N - spelt with a }{\b\i\f1 k}{\i\f1  in the two latter sources)}{\f1 , not to be confused with the past tense of }{\b\f1 car}{\f1 - (}{\b\f1 carin}{\f1 ).
\par }{\b\f1 \tab carneambarai}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "red-???" }{\i\f1 (Narqelion; very early "Qenya")}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab carnevait\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1  "red sky" }{\i\f1 (MC:221; this is "Qenya")}{\b\f1 
\par \tab carnevalinar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "red-???" }{\i\f1 (Narqelion; very early "Qenya")}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Carnil}{\i\f1  ("k")}{\f1  name of a star (or planet), identified with Mars }{\i\f1 (MR:435)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Carnim\'edri\'eb}{\f1  "Red-jewelled", the rowan-tree in Quickbeam's song }{\i\f1 (LotR2:III ch. 4, SA:caran)}{\f1 , also translated "with adornment of red jewels" }{\i\f1 (Letters:224; where the reading "carnem\'edrie" occurs)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Carnistir}{\f1  "red-face", masc. name, mother-name (never used in narrative) of }{\b\f1 Morifinw\'eb}{\f1  = Caranthir }{\i\f1 (PM:353)}{\f1 
\par \tab [}{\b\f1 caro}{\f1 ] }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "doer, actor, agent" }{\i\f1 (KAR; replaced by }{\b\i\f1 tyaro}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b carr\'eba}{  (for }{\b cas}{-}{\b raya}{) "tressure" (net for confining the hair). }{\i (VT42:12)}{\i\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Casar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "Dwarf", pl. }{\b\f1 Casari}{\f1  or }{\b\f1 Cas\'e1ri}{\f1 , partitive plural }{\b\f1 Casalli}{\f1 . Adapted from Dwarvish }{\i\f1 Khaz\'e2d}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Casarrondo}{
\f1  "Khazad-d\'fbm", Moria }{\i\f1 (WJ:388, 389; pl. }{\b\i\f1 Cas\'e1ri}{\i\f1  also in WJ:402)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab cassa}{\f1  "helmet" }{\i\f1 (KAS)}{\f1 . Cf. }{\b\f1 carma}{\f1  in a later source.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Castamir}{\f1  masc. name, "}{\i\f1 casta}{\f1 [?]-jewel" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab cauca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "crooked" }{\i\f1 (LT1:257; cf. }{\b\i\f1 cawin}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab cauco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "humpback" }{\i\f1 (LT1:257)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab caur\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "fear" }{\i\f1 (LT1:257)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab caur\'eba}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "timid" }{\i\f1 (LT1:257)}{\f1  
\par }{\b\f1 \tab caut\'e1ron}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "bent" }{\i\f1 (MC:216; this is "Qenya")}{\b\f1 
\par \tab caw}{\f1 - "bow" }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (1st pers aorist }{\b\f1 cawin}{\f1  "I bow") }{\i\f1 (LT1:257; cf. }{\b\i\f1 cauca}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 cauco}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 . In Tolkien's later Quenya, a verb of this shape with }{\b\f1 w}{\f1  in this 
position does not seem to fit the general phonology well.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab cectel\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "fountain" }{\i\f1 (LT1:257, LT2:338. In LotR-style Quenya use rather }{\b\i\f1 ehtel\'eb}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab celma}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "channel" }{\i\f1 (KEL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab celu}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "stream" }{\i\f1 (LT1:257; rather }{\b\i\f1 celum\'eb}{\i\f1  in LotR-style Quenya) }{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab celum\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "stream, flow" }{\i\f1 (KEL, LT1:257)}{\f1 ; locative pl. }{\b\f1 celumessen}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'ebar-celumessen}{\f1 
 is translated "in the flowing sea", lit. *"in the sea-streams").
\par }{\b\f1 \tab celusindi}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "a river" }{\i\f1 (LT1:257; hardly a valid word in Tolkien's later Quenya - use }{\b\i\f1 s\'edr\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 celuss\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "freshlet, water falling out swiftly from a rocky spring" }{\i\f1 (UT:426)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 celvar}{\f1  (sg. #}{\b\f1 celva}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "animals, living things that move" }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab cemen}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 c\'e9n}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "earth", referring to the earth as a flat floor beneath }{\i\f1 menel}{\f1 , the heavens }{\i\f1 (SA:kemen)}{\f1 ; "soil, earth"}{\i\f1  (KEM,}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 LT1:257). }{\f1 
At one stage, Tolkien intended }{\b\f1 cemen}{\f1  to be the genitive of }{\b\f1 c\'e9n}{\f1 ; later }{\b\f1 cemen}{\f1  became the nominative, and the status of }{\b\f1 c\'e9n}{\f1  is doubtful.}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Cemendur}{\f1  masc. name, *"Earth-servant" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab cemi}{\f1  "earth, soil, land"; }{\b\f1 C\'e9mi}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "Mother Earth" }{\i\f1 (LT1:257; the "Qenya" word }{\b\i\f1 cemi}{\i\f1  surely corresponds to }{\b\i\f1 cemen}{\i\f1  in LotR-style Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab cemnaro}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "potter" }{\i\f1 (TAN)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b c\'e9}{ }{\i ("k")}{ particle indicating uncertainty, possibly like English *"maybe, perhaps" (VT42:34; **}{\b ce}{ in Bill Welden's note is a misspelling, VT44:38). In VT42, Welden wrote that Tolkien altered }{\b k\'e9}{ to }{\b kw\'ed}{ (or }{
\b kw\'edta}{, q.v.), but Welden later noted that "it does not follow that because the form was changed in another sentence it would necessarily have been corrected in the examples cited" (VT44:38). So }{\b c\'e9}{/}{\b k\'e9}{
 may still be a conceptually valid form. (The forms in }{\b kw}{- rather than }{\b qu}{- seem abnormal for Quenya, at least as far as spelling is concerned.)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab c\'e9n}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "soil, earth"; see }{\b\f1 cemen}{\i\f1  (KEM)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab cen}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "see, behold", future tense }{\b\f1 cenuva}{\f1  ("kenuva") "shall see" in }{\i\f1 Markirya. }{\f1 Also #}{\b\f1 cen}{\f1  = noun "sight" as the final element of some nouns (*}{\b\f1 apacen}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tercen
}{\f1 , q.v.)
\par \tab }{\b\f1 cenda}{\f1 - verb "watch" (not "guard", but observe to gain information), also used = "read". }{\b\f1 Cenda}{\f1  = also noun "reading", as in }{\b\f1 sanwecenda}{\f1  "thought-inspection, thought-reading". }{\i\f1 (VT41:5)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab centa}{\f1  "communication, enquiry, *essay"; }{\b\f1 \'d3sanw\'eb-centa}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "Communication of Thought", an appendix to Pengolodh's }{\i\f1 Lammas}{\f1  or "Account of Tongues" }{\i\f1 (VT39:23, MR:415)}{\f1 ; cf. also }
{\b\f1 essecenta}{\f1 , q.v.}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab centano}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "potter" }{\i\f1 (TAN)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Cermi\'eb}{\f1  seventh month of the year, "July" }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab certa}{\f1  "rune" (pl. }{\b\f1 certar}{\f1  given), adapted from Sindarin }{\i\f1 certh}{\f1  (a "true" or inherited Quenya form of primitive *}{\i\f1 kirt\'ea}{\f1  would have been *}{\b\f1 cirt\'eb}{\f1 , but this word did not occur). }{
\i\f1 (WJ:396)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab cild\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "saw" (???) The phrase }{\b\f1 \'fari kilde h\'edsen n\'ede nienaite}{\f1 
 is translated "the Sun with wet eyes dropped tears of mist", literally perhaps something like *"the Sun saw (through) misty tears tearfully"??? }{\i\f1 (MC:221; this is "Qenya"; cf. }{\b\i\f1 cildo}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab cildo }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "one saw" }{\i\f1 (MC:220; this is "Qenya"; cf. }{\b\i\f1 cild\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab }{\f1 #}{\b\f1 cilm\'eb}{\f1  "choosing" (isolated from }{\b\f1 Essecilm\'eb }{\f1 "name-choosing", q.v.)}{\i\f1  (MR:214)}{\f1 ; also in #}{\b\f1 cilmess\'eb }{\f1 pl. }{\b\f1 cilmessi}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1 
 "self-names", literally names of personal choice }{\i\f1 (PM:339)}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 cilm\'eb}{\f1  + }{\b\f1 essi}{\f1 , hence *"choice-names").
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ciluva }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "shall see" }{\i\f1 (MC:213, 214; this is "Qenya")}{\b\f1 
\par \tab cilya}{\f1  "chasm", allative }{\b\f1 cilyanna}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "in-Chasm" (sc. "into [the] chasm") }{\i\f1 (LR:47, 56). }{\f1 In MR:471, }{\b\f1 cilya}{\f1  is defined as "cleft, gorge". Spelt }{\i\f1 kilya}{\f1 
 in Etym, there defined as "cleft, pass between hills, gorge" }{\i\f1 (KIL)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 cim}{\f1 - "heed" }{\i\f1 (GL:39)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab c\'edra}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "sail", verb (apparently the continuative stem of *}{\b\f1 cir}{\f1 -) (}{\i\f1 Markirya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab circa}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "sickle" }{\i\f1 (KIRIK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab c\'edrier}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "clove" }{\i\f1 (MC:216; this is "Qenya")}{\b\f1 
\par \tab cirinci}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1 , sg. *}{\b\f1 cirinc\'eb}{\f1 , a species of birds, "no bigger than wrens, but all scarlet, with piping voices on the edge of human hearing" }{\i\f1 (UT:169)}{\f1 . Seems to incorporate the diminutive ending -}{
\b\f1 inc\'eb}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ciris}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "cleft, crack" }{\i\f1 (LT2:337 - obsoleted by }{\b\i\f1 ciriss\'eb}{\i\f1 ?)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ciriss\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "slash, gash" }{\i\f1 (KIRIS)}{\f1 
\par \tab *}{\b\f1 cirt\'eb}{\f1  see }{\b\f1 certa}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab cirya }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "ship" }{\i\f1 (MC:213, 214, 220, 221)}{\f1 , "(sharp-prowed) ship" }{\i\f1 (SA:kir-, where the word is misspelt }{\b\i\f1 c\'edrya}{\i\f1  with a long }{\b\i\f1 \'ed}{\i\f1 
; Christopher Tolkien probably confused it with the first element of the Sindarin name }{\b\i\f1 C\'edrdan}{\i\f1 . It seems that }{\b\i\f1 C\'edryon}{\i\f1 , the name of Isildur's son, is likewise misspelt; read }{\b\i\f1 Ciryon }{\i\f1 
as in the index and the main text of the Silmarillion. Cf. also }{\b\i\f1 kirya}{\i\f1  in Etym, stem KIR.) }{\f1 Also in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 . In the Plotz letter, }{\b\f1 cirya}{\f1  is inflected for all cases except plural possessive (*}{\b\f1 
ciryaiva}{\f1 ). Locative }{\b\f1 ciryasse }{\f1 "upon a ship" }{\i\f1 (MC:216)}{\f1 . Compounded in }{\b\f1 ciryaquen}{\f1  "shipman, sailor" }{\i\f1 (WJ:372)}{\f1 . Masc. names }{\b\f1 Ciryaher}{\f1  *"Ship-lord" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 
Ciryandil}{\f1  *"Ship-friend" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Ciryatan}{\f1  *"Ship-builder" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 , also }{\b\f1 Tar-Ciryatan}{\f1 , name of a N\'famen\'f3rean king, "King Shipbuilder" }{\i\f1 (SA:kir-)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ciryamo}{\f1  "mariner", nominative and genitive identical since the noun already ends in -}{\b\f1 o}{\f1 , cf. }{\b\f1 Indis i-Ciryamo}{\f1  "the Mariner's Wife" }{\i\f1 (UT:8)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab coa}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k\'f6a")}{\f1  "house"; }{\b\f1 coarya}{\f1  "his house" }{\i\f1 (WJ:369)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 coacalina}{\f1  "light of the house"}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (a metaphor for the soul [}{\b\i\f1 f\'eba}{\i\f1 ] dwelling inside the body [}{
\b\i\f1 hroa}{\i\f1 ]) (MR:250)}{\b\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 coi}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "life" }{\i\f1 (LT1:257; in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 cuil\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab coimas}{\f1  "life-bread" = Sindarin }{\i\f1 lembas}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (SA:cuivi\'eb, PM:395)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 coimas Eldaron}{\f1  "the coimas of the Eldar" }{\i\f1 (PM:395)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab coina}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "alive" }{\i\f1 (LT1:257; Tolkien's later Quenya also has }{\b\i\f1 cuina}{\i\f1 , though }{\b\i\f1 coina}{\i\f1  may still be valid.)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 coir\'eb}{\f1  "stirring", in the calendar of Imladris a precisely defined period of 54 days }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)}{\f1 , but translated "the first day of Spring" in the }{\i\f1 Silmarillion}{\f1 
 Appendix }{\i\f1 (SA:cuivi\'eb)}{\f1 . Early "Qenya" has }{\b\f1 coir\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "life" }{\i\f1 (LT1:257; in Tolkien's later Quenya, the word for "life" is }{\b\i\f1 cuil\'eb}{\i\f1 ; however, cf. the adj. }{\b\i\f1 coir\'eba}{
\i\f1  from a late source)}{\f1 .
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab coir\'eba}{\f1  "living" (glossed "alive" in LT1:257), }{\b\f1 coir\'eba quenya}{\f1  "living speech" }{\i\f1 (PM:399)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab coit\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "living being" }{\i\f1 (LT1:257)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab coiva}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "awake" }{\i\f1 (LT1:257 - read *}{\b\i\f1 cuiva}{\i\f1  in LotR-style Quenya? Cf. }{\b\i\f1 coivi\'eb}{\i\f1  becoming }{\b\i\f1 cuivi\'eb}{\i\f1 . On the other hand, the elements }{\b\i\f1 cui}{\i\f1 
- and }{\b\i\f1 coi}{\i\f1 - having to do with life and awakening cannot be wholly separated.}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab coivi\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "awakening", noun }{\i\f1 (LT1:257; in LotR-style Quenya }{\b\i\f1 cuivi\'eb}{\i\f1 , as in }{\b\i\f1 Cuivi\'e9nen}{\i\f1 ) }{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab }{\f1 #}{\b\f1 colindo}{\f1  "bearer", in }{\b\f1 cormacolindor}{\f1  (q.v.)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab colla}{\f1  "borne, worn" (past participle of }{\b\f1 col}{\f1 - "bear"); also used as a noun = "vestment, cloak" }{\i\f1 (MR:385)}{\f1 . Variant form }{\b\f1 collo}{\f1  "cloak" }{\i\f1 (SA:thin(d) ) }{\f1 in the name }{\b\f1 Sindicollo}{
\f1  (q.v.), sc. }{\b\f1 colla}{\f1  with a masculine ending.
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 c\'f3lo}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "burden"}{\i\f1  (VT39:10)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab [}{\b\f1 c\'f3pa}{\f1 ] }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "harbour, bay" }{\i\f1 (KOP; changed to }{\b\i\f1 h\'f3pa}{\i\f1 , KHOP)}{\f1 . Early "Qenya" likewise has}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 c\'f3pa}{\f1  (also }{\b\f1 c\'f3pas
}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "harbour" }{\i\f1 (LT1:257)}{\f1 . 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab coranar}{\f1  "sun-round", solar year }{\i\f1 (Appendix D; pl. }{\b\i\f1 coran\'e1ri}{\i\f1  in PM:126)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab corco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "crow" }{\i\f1 (KORKA, see KARKA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab corda}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "temple" }{\i\f1 (LT1:257)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab cordon}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "idol" }{\i\f1 (LT1:257)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab corima}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "round" }{\i\f1 (LT1:257)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab corin}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "circular enclosure" }{\i\f1 (KOR)}{\f1 . In the early "Qenya Lexicon", this word was defined as "a circular enclosure, especially on a hill-top" }{\i\f1 (LT1:257)}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab }{\f1 #}{\b\f1 corma}{\f1  "ring", isolated from #}{\b\f1 cormacolindo}{\f1  "Ring-bearer", pl. }{\b\f1 cormacolindor}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (LotR3:VI ch. 4, translated in Letters:308}{\f1 ); }{\b\f1 Cormar\'eb}{\f1  "Ringday", a festival held on }{
\i\f1 Yavanni\'eb}{\f1  30 in honour of Frodo }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab corna}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "round, globed"}{\i\f1  (KOR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab corn\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "loaf" }{\i\f1 (LT1:257)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Corollair\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("Korollair\'eb")}{\f1  see }{\b\f1 Coron Oiolair\'eb}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab coromindo}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "cupola, dome" }{\i\f1 (KOR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab coron}{\f1  (1) "mound" }{\i\f1 (SA)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Coron Oiolair\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("Koron")}{\f1 , the "Mound of Eversummer" where the Two Trees grew. Also contracted }{\b\f1 Corollair\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ:401)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab coron}{\f1  (2) }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 corn}{\f1 -, as in dat. sg. }{\b\f1 cornen}{\f1 ) "globe, ball" }{\i\f1 (KOR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Cosmoco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "Gothmog" }{\i\f1 (LT2:344)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab costa}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "quarrel" }{\i\f1 (KOT > KOTH)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab cotumo}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "enemy" }{\i\f1 (KOT > KOTH)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab cotya}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "hostile" }{\i\f1 (KOT > KOTH)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab c\'fa}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "arch, crescent" }{\i\f1 (KU3)}{\f1 ; "crescent Moon" }{\i\f1 (LT1:271; the long vowel was denoted by a circumflex rather than an accent in the early "Qenya" lexicon)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab cu}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 cua}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "dove"}{\i\f1  (K\'db)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab cuil\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "life, being alive" }{\i\f1 (KUY)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab cuina}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "alive" }{\i\f1 (KUY)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab cuiv\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "awakening" }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (KUY)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab cuiv\'eba}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "wakening" }{\i\f1 (adj) (KUY).
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 cuivi\'eb}{\f1  "awakening" as noun (early "Qenya" }{\b\f1 coivi\'eb}{\f1 , q.v.) In }{\b\f1 Cuivi\'e9nen}{\f1 , "Water of Awakening" }{\i\f1 (SA:cuivi\'eb, SA:nen, KUY; spelt with a }{\b\i\f1 k}{
\i\f1  in the }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 . Somewhat surprisingly, }{\b cuivi\'eb}{ is used to mean "life" in }{\b cuivie-lancasse}{ }{\i ("k")}{, literally 'on the brink of life' ("of a perilous situation in which one is likely to fall into death") }
{\i (VT42:8)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab culda}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "flame-coloured, golden-red" }{\i\f1 (KUL)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab culina}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "flame-coloured, golden-red" }{\i\f1 (KUL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab }{\f1 +}{\b\f1 cullo}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "red gold" }{\i\f1 (KUL)
\par }{\f1 \tab [}{\b\f1 culo}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 culu}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "gold" (substance)] }{\i\f1 (KUL; the word }{\b\i\f1 culu}{\i\f1  also occurred in early "Qenya" [LT1:258], but in the }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1  it was struck out. Use }{\b\i\f1 malta}
{\i\f1 .)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab culucalmal\'ednen}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "with golden lights" }{\i\f1 (MC:220; this is "Qenya")}{\b\f1 
\par \tab culuina}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "orange" }{\i\f1 (colour not fruit) (KUL)
\par }{\f1 \tab [}{\b\f1 culuinn}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (evidently a misreading for *}{\b\i\f1 culuina}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 ]}{\i\f1  }{\f1 "of gold" }{\i\f1 (KUL; this doubtful word was struck out, and }{\b\i\f1 culuina}{\i\f1 
 became the adjective "orange" instead.)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab culuma}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "orange" }{\i\f1 (fruit not colour)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (KUL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab culumalda}{\f1  a kind of tree (evidently orange-tree, }{\b\f1 culuma}{\f1  + }{\b\f1 alda}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (SA:mal-)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Cul\'farien}{\f1  another name of Laurelin; apparently derived from the stem KUL- "golden-red" }{\i\f1 (Silm; LR:365)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab culuvai}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 ??? }{\i\f1 (Narqelion)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab c\'fama}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "the Void" }{\i\f1 (KUM, (GAS) )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab cumb\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "mound, heap" }{\i\f1 (KUB)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab cumna}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "empty"}{\i\f1  (KUM)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab c\'fana}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  1) adjective "bent, curved", from which is derived 2) the verb }{\b\f1 c\'fana}{\f1 - "bend", occurring with }{\b\f1 a}{\f1 - prefix (changed by Tolkien from a }{\b\f1 na}{\f1 -prefix) in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{
\f1 . Here }{\b\f1 c\'fana}{\f1 - is intransitive; we do not know whether it can also be transitive "bend".
\par \tab }{\b\f1 cundo}{\f1  "guardian" }{\i\f1 (PM:260)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab cundu}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "prince" }{\i\f1 (KUND\'db)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab c\'fan\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "crescent, bow" }{\i\f1 (LT1:271)}{\f1 . Cf. }{\b\f1 c\'fa}{\f1 .
\par \tab }{\b\f1 curo}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 curu}{\f1 -) "a skillful [?device \-}{\i\f1 - Tolkien's handwriting was illegible}{\f1 ]". }{\i\f1 (VT41:10)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab curu}{\f1  "skill" in Curufin, Curufinw\'eb, Curunir. }{\i\f1 (SA; possibly the same as }{\b\i\f1 curo}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 curu}{\i\f1 - above - but there was a word }{\b\i\f1 curu}{\i\f1 
 [spelt "kuru"] in Tolkien's early "Qenya", glossed "magic, wizardry" [LT1:269]).}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Curufinw\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (so spelt in Silm; "Kurufinw\'eb" in PM)}{\f1  *"Skillful Finw\'eb", a name of F\'ebanor }{\i\f1 (PM:343)}{\f1 ; also the origin of the Sindarin name }{\i\f1 Curufin}{\f1 ; F\'eb
anor named his favourite son after himself. Short Quenya name }{\b\f1 Curvo}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (PM:352)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Curumo }{\f1 *"Cunning One", "Saruman" }{\i\f1 (UT:401)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab curuni}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "witch" (of the good magic) }{\i\f1 (LT1:269)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab curuvar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "wizard" }{\i\f1 (LT1:269 - but Gandalf, Saruman etc. were }{\b\i\f1 istari}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Curvo}{\f1  see }{\b\f1 Curufinw\'eb
\par \tab curw\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "craft"}{\i\f1  (KUR)}{\f1 , "skill of the hand" }{\i\f1 (VT41:10)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Curw\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("K")}{\f1  "technical skill and invention" }{\i\f1 (PM:360 cf. 344)}{\f1 
\par 
\par 
\par <D>
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 dil}{\f1 , -}{\b\f1 ndil}{\f1  = Old English "-wine", sc. "-friend" in names, e.g. }{\b\f1 Elendil}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 E\'e4rendil}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (NIL/NDIL)}{\f1 
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 dur}{\f1  }{\i\f1 see }{\f1 -}{\b\f1 ndur}{\f1  }{\b\f1 
\par 
\par }{\f1 <E>
\par }{\b\f1 \tab e}{\f1  unidentified word in the sentence }{\b\f1 e man antav\'e1ro?}{\f1  (LR:63), "what will he give indeed?" It may be an adverbial particle "indeed"; on the other hand, one very early "Qenya" text may suggest that it is the pr
onoun "he", though "he" is also expressed as the ending -}{\b\f1 ro}{\f1 : *"He - what will he give?" A word }{\i\f1 e}{\f1  "he" also occurs in the Sindarin text of the King's Letter (}{\cf1 SD:128-9}{\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'eba}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("e\'e4")}{\f1  "is" }{\i\f1 (CO)}{\f1 , in a more absolute sense ("exists", VT39:7) than the copula }{\b\f1 n\'e1}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 E\'e4}{\f1  "it is" }{\i\f1 (VT39:6)}{\f1 
 or "let it be", used as a noun for "All Creation", the universe }{\i\f1 (WJ:402; Letters:284, footnote)}{\f1 , but this term for the universe "was not held to include [souls?] and spirits" }{\i\f1 (VT39:20)}{\f1 .}{\i\f1  }{\f1 
Early "Qenya" also has a word }{\b\f1 \'eba}{\f1  "eagle" }{\i\f1 (LT1:251, LT2:338)}{\f1 , but this is certainly obsoleted by }{\b\f1 soron}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 sorn\'eb}{\f1  in Tolkien's later forms of Quenya. 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'ebala}{\f1  "being, spirit" (pl. }{\b\f1 \'ebalar}{\f1  is attested), spirits whose natural state it is to exist without a physical body, like Balrogs }{\i\f1 (MR:165)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'ebar}{\f1  "sea" }{\i\f1 (AYAR/AIR [gives also dat. sg. }{\b\i\f1 \'ebaren}{\i\f1 ],}{\f1  }{\i\f1 WJ:413; see Letters:386 for etymology)}{\f1 , pl. }{\b\f1 \'ebari}{\f1  "seas" }{\i\f1 (FS, LR:47)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 E\'e4r}{\f1 
 "the Great Sea", ablative }{\b\f1 E\'e4rello}{\f1  "from the Great Sea", }{\b\f1 et E\'e4rello}{\f1  "out of the Great Sea" }{\i\f1 (EO)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 E\'e4r\'eb}{\f1  "the open sea" }{\i\f1 (SD:305)}{\f1 . Compound }{\b\f1 \'ebaruil\'eb}{\f1 
 "seaweed" }{\i\f1 (UY)}{\f1 . Found in names like }{\b\f1 E\'e4rendil}{\f1  "Sea-friend", }{\b\f1 E\'e4rr\'e1m\'eb}{\f1  "Sea-wing" }{\i\f1 (SA)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 E\'e4rendur}{\f1  masc. name, *"Sea-servant"; in effect a variant of }{\i\f1 E\'e4rendil}{\f1 
 }{\i\f1 (Appendix A). }{\b\f1 E\'e4rendur}{\f1  was also used ="(professional) mariner" }{\i\f1 (Letters:386)}{\f1 .}{\i\f1  }{\f1 Fem. name }{\b\f1 E\'e4rwen}{\f1  "Sea-maiden" }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 E\'e4rr\'e1m\'eb}{\f1 
 "Sea-wing", "Wings of the Sea", name of Tuor's ship }{\i\f1 (RAM, AYAR/AIR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'ebaren}{\f1  "eagle" or "eyrie" }{\i\f1 (LT1:251; this early "Qenya" word is certainly no more valid than }{\b\i\f1 \'eba}{\i\f1  "eagle" in LotR-style Quenya.)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab E\'e4rendilyon}{\f1  "son of E\'e4rendel" ("used of any mariner") }{\i\f1 (LT1:251)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab E\'e4rnil}{\f1  masc. name, contraction of }{\b\f1 E\'e4rendil}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab E\'e4rnur}{\f1  masc.name, contraction of }{\b\f1 E\'e4rendur}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab eccaira}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "remote, far" (adj.) }{\i\f1 (KHAYA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ecco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "spear" }{\i\f1 (EK/EKTE)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ecet}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "short broad-bladed sword" }{\i\f1 (UT:284)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ectel\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "fountain", also }{\b\f1 cectel\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (LT1:257, LT2:338; in LotR-style Quenya }{\b\i\f1 ehtel\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par \tab #}{\b\f1 ecya}{\f1  "sharp" in }{\b\f1 Ecyan\'e1ro}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "Sharp Flame", masc. name, Sindarin }{\i\f1 Aegnor}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (VT41:14, 19)}{\f1 . The Quenya form of }{\i\f1 Aegnor}{\f1  is elsewhere given as }{\b\f1 Aican\'e1ro}{\f1 
 instead.
\par \tab [}{\b\f1 ehtar}{\f1 ] "spearman" }{\i\f1 (EK/EKTE)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab eht\'eb}{\f1  "spear"}{\i\f1  (EK/EKTE)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ehtel\'eb}{\f1  "issue of water, spring" }{\i\f1 (SA:kel-, KEL, ET)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ehtyar}{\f1  "spearman" }{\i\f1 (EK/EKTE)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ekkaia}{\f1  name of the outer ocean: for *}{\i\f1 et-gaya}{\f1 ? }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
\par \tab \'86}{\b\f1 \'e9l}{\f1  "star", pl. }{\b\f1 \'e9li}{\f1  given }{\i\f1 (WJ:362, EL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ela! }{\f1 "behold!" (directing sight to an actually visible object) }{\i\f1 (WJ:362)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab elda}{\f1  1. adj. "of the stars", 2. noun (}{\b\f1 Elda}{\f1 ) = one of the people of the Stars, high-elf }{\i\f1 (SA:\'eal, elen, ELED, \'c9LED; note that Tolkien abandoned a former etymology with "depart")}{\f1 , chiefly in the pl }{\b\f1 
Eldar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ:362, cf. GAT(H), TELES)}{\f1 .}{\i\f1  }{\f1 Gen. pl. }{\b\f1 Eldaron}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ:368, PM:395, 402)}{\f1 ;}{\i\f1  }{\f1 dative pl.}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 eldain}{\f1  "for elves", for Eldar }{\i\f1 (FS)}{\f1 ; possessive sg. }{
\b\f1 Eldava}{\f1  "Elf's" }{\i\f1 (WJ:407)}{\f1 ; possessive pl. }{\b\f1 Eldaiva}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ:368)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Eldaiv\'eb}{\f1  governing a plural word }{\i\f1 (WJ:369)}{\f1 . The word }{\b\f1 Eldar}{\f1  properly refers to the non-Avari Elves
 only, but since Eldar rarely had any contact with the Avari, it could be used for "elves" in general (in LT1:251, }{\b\f1 Elda}{\f1  is simply glossed "Elf"). See also }{\b\f1 Eldo}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Eldacan}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  (masc. name) "\'c6lfnoth", Elf-bold }{\i\f1 (KAN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Eldacar}{\f1  masc. name, *"Elf-head"??? }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Elda-lamb\'eb}{\f1  "the language of the Eldar" }{\i\f1 (WJ:368)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 Eldali\'eb}{\f1  "the Elven-folk" (often used vaguely to mean all the race of Elves, though it properly did not include the Avari) }{\i\f1 (WJ:374, \'c9LED; possessive }{\b\i\f1 Eldali\'e9va}{\i\f1 
 in the name }{\b\i\f1 Mindon Eldali\'e9va}{\i\f1 , q.v.)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 Eldamar}{\f1  "Elvenhome" }{\i\f1 (\'c9LED; found already in Narqelion)}{\f1 , according to MR:176 another name of }{\b\f1 Tirion}{\f1  (see }{\b\f1 tir}{\f1 -).
\par #}{\b\f1 Eldameldo}{\f1  pl. }{\b\f1 Eldameldor}{\f1  "Elf-lovers" }{\i\f1 (WJ:412)
\par }{\b\f1 Eldandil}{\f1  (pl. }{\b\f1 Eldandili}{\f1  in WJ:412) "Elf-friend" (by the Edain confused with }{\b\f1 Elendil}{\f1 , properly "Star-friend") }{\i\f1 (WJ:410)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 Eldanor}{\f1  "Elvenland", regions of Valinor where the Elves dwelt and the stars could be seen }{\i\f1 (MR:176)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Eldarin}{\f1  adjective derived from }{\b\f1 Elda}{\f1 : "Eldarin, Elvish" }{\i\f1 (Silm, \'c9LED)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Eldarissa}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Eldaquet}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  apparently other names of Qenya }{\i\f1 (LT2:348)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Eldo}{\f1  archaic variant of }{\b\f1 Elda}{\f1 , properly one of the "Marchers" from Cuivi\'e9nen, but the word went out of use}{\i\f1  (WJ:363, 374)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Elemm\'edr\'eb}{\f1  *"Star-jewel" (}{\b\f1 elen}{\f1  + }{\b\f1 m\'edre}{\f1 , note assimilation }{\b\f1 nm}{\f1  > }{\b\f1 mm}{\f1 ), name of a star/planet (possibly Mercury, MR:435, where the spelling is }{\b\f1 Elemmir\'eb}{\f1 
); also name of an Elf. }{\i\f1 (SA:m\'eer)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab elen}{\f1  "star" }{\i\f1 (SA:\'eal, elen, EL)}{\f1 ; pl. }{\b\f1 eleni}{\f1  (occasionally in verse: }{\b\f1 eldi}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (WJ:362)}{\f1 ; gen. pl. }{\b\f1 elenion}{\f1  in the phrase }{\b\f1 Elenion Ancalima}{\f1 
 "brightest of stars" }{\i\f1 (LotR2:IV ch. 9; see Letters:385 for translation)}{\f1 ; allative }{\b\f1 elenna}{\f1  "starwards" used as name of N\'famenor }{\i\f1 (Silm; }{\f1 see }{\b\f1 Elenna}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 ; ablative pl. }{\b\f1 elenillor}{\f1 
 "from stars" in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 . 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 elena}{\f1  adj. "of the stars" }{\i\f1 (SA:\'eal, elen)}{\f1 ; also }{\b\f1 elenya
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Elenarda}{\f1  "Star-kingdom", upper sky }{\i\f1 (3AR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Elend\'eb}{\f1  "Elvenhome", regions of Valinor where the Elves dwelt and the stars could be seen }{\i\f1 (MR:176, \'c9LED)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Elendil}{\f1  masc. name}{\i\f1  }{\f1 "Star-friend", "Lover or student of stars", applied to those devoted to astronomical lore. However, when the Edain used this name they intended it to mean "Elf-friend", confusing }{\b\f1 elen}{\f1  
"star" and }{\b\f1 elda}{\f1  "elf" }{\i\f1 (WJ:410)}{\f1 . (This idea that the name was misapplied seems to be late; Tolken earlier interpreted the name as an ancient compound }{\i\f1 Eled}{\f1  + }{\i\f1 ndil}{\f1 ; see Letters:386. See also }{\i\f1 
NIL/NDIL}{\f1  in the Etymologies, where Elendil is equated with "\'c6lfwine", Elf-friend). Allative }{\b\f1 Elendilenna}{\f1  "to Elendil" }{\i\f1 (PM:401)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Elendil Vorondo}{\f1  genitive of }{\b\f1 Elendil Voronda}{\f1 
 "Elendil the Steadfast" }{\i\f1 (CO) }{\f1 Pl. }{\b\f1 Elendili}{\f1  the N\'famen\'f3rean Elf-friends }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Elendur}{\f1  masc. name, *"Star-servant", probably intended to mean *"Elf-servant"; in effect a variant of }{\i\f1 Elendil}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Elenna}{\f1  "Starwards", a name of N\'famenor: }{\b\f1 Elenna-n\'f3r\'eb}{\f1  *"Starwards-land", "the land named Starwards", genitive }{\b\f1 Elenna-n\'f3r\'ebo}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 CO}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Elent\'e1ri}{\f1  "Star-queen", title of Varda }{\i\f1 (EL, SA:tar)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Elenw\'eb}{\f1  *"Star-person", fem. name }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab elenya}{\i\f1  }{\f1 *"stellar" (only defined as an adjective referring to stars by Tolkien) }{\i\f1 (WJ:362)}{\f1 . Cf. }{\b\f1 Elenya}{\f1 , name of the first day of the Eldarin six-day week, dedicated to the stars }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)}{
\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Eler\'edna}{\f1  "star-crowned", a name of Taniquetil }{\i\f1 (EL, RIG)}{\f1 , spelt }{\b\f1 Elerr\'edna}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 Silm
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Eleross\'eb}{\f1  masc. name, "star foam", starlit foam, Sindarin }{\i\f1 Elros}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (PM:348)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Elerr\'edna}{\f1  "Crowned with Stars" (}{\b\f1 elen}{\f1  + }{\b\f1 r\'edna}{\f1 ), a name of Taniquetil }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 ; spelt }{\b\f1 Eler\'edna}{\f1  in the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1  (}{\i\f1 EL}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 RIG}{\f1 ).
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Elessar}{\f1  "Elf-stone" (}{\b\f1 Elen}{\f1  + }{\b\f1 sar}{\f1 , actually *"Star-stone", cf. }{\b\f1 Elendil}{\f1  concerning }{\b\f1 elen}{\f1  "star" being used to mean "Elf") }{\i\f1 (LotR3:V ch. 8)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Elessar}{\f1 
 may also be seen as a pun or variant of }{\b\f1 Elesser}{\f1  "Elf-friend".}{\b\f1 
\par \tab Elesser}{\f1  (masc. name = Old English }{\i\f1 \'c6lfwine}{\f1 , Elf-friend) }{\i\f1 (SER)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ellair\'eb}{\f1  alternative name of June }{\i\f1 (PM:135)}{\f1 ; evidently incorporating }{\b\f1 lair\'eb}{\f1  "summer"; the }{\b\f1 el}{\f1 - part is probably an assimilated form of }{\b\f1 er}{\f1 -, an element meaning }{\i\f1 one}{\f1 
 or }{\i\f1 first}{\f1 , June being the first summer month.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ell\'eb}{\f1  "came", pl. }{\b\f1 eller}{\f1  with a plural subject}{\i\f1  (MC:215; this is "Qenya")}{\f1 
\par \tab [}{\b\f1 ello}{\f1 ] "call, shout of triumph"}{\i\f1  (GYEL (< GEL) )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab elv\'eba}{\f1  "starlike, like stars", pl. }{\b\f1 elvi\'eb}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 Markirya
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Elw\'eb}{\f1  masc. name, *"Star-person" }{\i\f1 (PM:340, WJ:369, WEG)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab elwen}{\f1  "heart" }{\i\f1 (LT1:255; rather }{\b\i\f1 h\'f3n}{\i\f1  or }{\b\i\f1 enda}{\i\f1  in LotR-style Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ely\'eb}{\f1  "even thou", emphatic 2. person sg. pronoun }{\i\f1 (Nam, RGEO:67)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab en}{\f1  (1) "there, look! yonder" }{\i\f1 (EN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab en }{\f1 (2) unidentified word occurring twice in F\'edriel's Song; according to the most plausible theory it is an adverbial particle denoting that the action of the following verb took place a long time ago.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab en}{\f1 - (3) prefix "re-, again-", in }{\b\f1 enquantuva}{\f1  "shall refill", }{\b\f1 entuluva}{\f1 , "shall come again", }{\b\f1 Envinyatar}{\f1  "Renewer", }{\b\f1 envinyanta}{\f1  "healed, *renewed", }{\b\f1 enyali\'eb}{\f1  "to recall" 
}{\i\f1 (Nam, RGEO:67, LotR3:V ch. 8, VT41:16, MR:405, UT:317)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 enda}{\f1  "heart", but not referring to the physical organ; it literally means "centre" (cf. }{\b\f1 end\'eb}{\f1 ) and refers to the }{\i\f1 f\'eba}{\f1  (soul) or }{\i\f1 s\'e1ma}{\f1  (mind) itself. }{\i\f1 (VT39:32)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Endamar}{\f1  "Middle-earth" }{\i\f1 (EN, MBAR, NDOR)}{\f1 . However, Middle-earth is normally called }{\b\f1 Endor}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 End\'f3r\'eb}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab end\'eb}{\f1  "core, centre, middle" }{\i\f1 (N\'c9D, EN)}{\f1 
\par \tab #}{\b\f1 end\'eba}{\f1  adj. "middle" in }{\b\f1 atend\'eba}{\f1 , q.v.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ender}{\f1  (surname of Tulkas) }{\i\f1 (NDER, TULUK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab enderi}{\f1  "middle-days", (sg. *}{\b\f1 ender\'eb}{\f1 ) in the calendar of Imladris three days inserted between the months (or seasons) }{\b\f1 y\'e1vi\'eb}{\f1  and }{\b\f1 quell\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Endien}{\f1  alternative term for "autumn" }{\i\f1 (PM:135)}{\f1 . In the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1 , the word }{\b\f1 Endien}{\f1 
 is assigned a quite different meaning: "Midyear, Midyear week", in the calendar of Valinor a week outside the months, between the sixth and seventh months, dedicated to the Trees; also called }{\i\f1 Aldalemnar (YEN, LEP/LEPEN/LEPEK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Endor}{\f1  "Middle-earth" }{\i\f1 (SA:d\'f4r, NDOR)}{\f1 , "centre of the world" }{\i\f1 (EN)}{\f1 ; also long form }{\b\f1 End\'f3r\'eb}{\f1  "Middle-earth" }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 ; allative }{\b\f1 Endorenna}{\f1 
 "to Middle-earth" in EO.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab endya}{\f1  > }{\b\f1 enya}{\f1  "middle" (adj.) }{\i\f1 (\'c9NED)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab enga}{\f1  "save" (= except) }{\i\f1 (FS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab engwa}{\f1  "sickly"; nominal pl. }{\b\f1 Engwar}{\f1  "the Sickly", Elvish name of Mortal Men }{\i\f1 (Silm, GENG-W\'c2)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 engw\'eb}{\f1  "thing" }{\i\f1 (VT39:7)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab enquantuva}{\f1  "shall refill" }{\i\f1 (Nam)}{\f1 ; see }{\b\f1 en}{\f1 -, }{\b\f1 quat}{\f1 -
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 enqu\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "six" }{\i\f1 (\'c9NEK)}{\f1 ; }{\b enqu\'eba}{ ordinal "sixth" }{\i (VT42:25)}{\i\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab enqui\'eb}{\f1  Eldarin six-day week, pl. }{\b\f1 enquier}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab enta}{\f1  demonstrative "that yonder" }{\i\f1 (EN)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 ent\'eb}{\f1  "center" }{\i\f1 (VT41:16; }{\b\i\f1 end\'eb}{\i\f1  is perhaps to be preferred, see }{\b\i\f1 entya}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Entar}{\f1  "Thither Lands, Middle-earth, Outer Lands, East" (seen from Aman) }{\i\f1 (EN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Entarda}{\f1  "Thither Lands, Middle-earth, Outer Lands, East" (seen from Aman) }{\i\f1 (EN)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 entya}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 enetya}{\f1  adj. "central, middle" }{\i\f1 (VT41:16; these forms, as well as the noun }{\b\i\f1 ent\'eb}{\i\f1  "centre", come from a late, somewhat confused source; the adjective #}{\b\i\f1 end\'eba}{\i\f1 
 and the noun }{\b\i\f1 end\'eb}{\i\f1  from earlier material may fit the general system better, and #}{\b\i\f1 end\'eba}{\i\f1  is even found in LotR itself)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ento}{\f1  "next" }{\i\f1 (Arct)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Enu}{\f1  "the Almighty Creator who dwells without the world" }{\i\f1 (LT2:343 - in Tolkien's later Quenya, this divine name appears as }{\b\i\f1 Eru}{\i\f1  instead)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Envinyatar}{\f1  "the Renewer" }{\i\f1 (LotR3:V ch. 8)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab envinyanta}{\f1  past participle "healed" }{\i\f1 (MR:405)}{\f1 , pointing to a verbal stem #}{\b\f1 envinyata}{\f1 - "heal", literally "renew"; cf. Aragorn's title }{\b\f1 Envinyatar}{\f1  "the Renewer" }{\i\f1 (LotR3:V ch. 8)}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 

\par }{\b\f1 \tab enwina}{\f1  "old" (}{\i\f1 Markirya)}{\f1   
\par }{\b\f1 \tab enya}{\f1  < }{\b\f1 endya}{\f1  "middle" (adj.) }{\i\f1 (EN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab enyali\'eb}{\f1  "to recall", "to commemorate", with infinitival ending -}{\b\f1 i\'eb}{\f1 ; dative }{\b\f1 enyalien}{\f1  "for the re-calling", "[in order] to recall" in }{\i\f1 CO}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab eny\'e1r\'eb}{\f1  "in that day" (pointing to the future) }{\i\f1 (FS)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab E\'f6nw\'eb}{\f1  name of a Maia, evidently adopted and adapted from Valarin }{\i\f1 (WJ:417)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b ep\'eb}{ preposition "before", erroneously glossed "after" }{\i (VT42:32; Bill Welden, the writer of the article in question, later presented this correction on the Elfling list)}{. However, }{\b ep\'eb}
{ does seem to have meant "after" in another conceptual phase; cf. }{\b epess\'eb}{ below.}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab epess\'eb}{\f1  "after-name", nickname, mostly given as a title of admiration or honour }{\i\f1 (PM:339, UT:266)}{\f1 . Cf. }{\b\f1 ess\'eb}{\f1  "name" and }{\b\f1 ep\'eb}{\f1  above.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab equ\'eb}{\f1  "say/says" or "said" (a tenseless pseudo-verb used to introduce quotations or a "that"-construction); with affixes }{\b\f1 equen}{\f1  "said I", }{\b\f1 eques}{\f1  "said he/she" }{\i\f1 (WJ:392, 415)}{\b\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab eques}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 equess}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 equessi}{\f1 ) "a saying, dictum, a quotation from someone's uttered words, a current or proverbial dictum" }{\i\f1 (WJ:392)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 I Equessi R\'familo}{\f1  "the Sayings of R\'fa
mil" }{\i\f1 (WJ:398)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab er}{\f1  "one, alone"}{\i\f1  (ERE)}{\f1 ; "only, but, still" }{\i\f1 (LT1:269)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab }{\f1 #}{\b\f1 er-}{\f1  "remain", verb }{\i\f1 (LT1:269; given in the form }{\b\i\f1 erin}{\i\f1  and glossed "remains"; }{\b\i\f1 erin}{\i\f1  would have to mean "I remain" in Tolkien's later Quenya, if this word is to be adapted.)}{\f1 

\par }{\b\f1 \tab erca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "prickle, spine"; }{\b\f1 erca}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "to prick"}{\i\f1  (ER\'c9K)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ercass\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "holly"}{\i\f1  (ER\'c9K)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ercoir\'eb}{\f1  alternative name of February }{\i\f1 (PM:135)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab erda}{\f1  "solitary, deserted" }{\i\f1 (LT1:269)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab erd\'eb}{\f1  (1) "seed, germ" }{\i\f1 (ER\'c9D)}{\f1 , (2) }{\b\f1 erd\'eb}{\f1  "singularity", the person as a whole }{\i\f1 (MR:216)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab er\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 eren}{\f1  "iron" or "steel"; }{\b\f1 Eremandu}{\f1  variant of }{\b\f1 Angamandu}{\f1  (Angband) }{\i\f1 (LT1:252; "iron" should be }{\b\i\f1 anga}{\i\f1  in LotR-style Quenya, but }{\b\i\f1 er\'eb}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 
eren}{\i\f1  may still be used for "steel". See also }{\b\i\f1 yaisa}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Eremandu}{\f1  "Hells of Iron", a name of Angband }{\i\f1 (LT1:249)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab eress\'eb}{\f1  "solitude", adj. }{\b\f1 eress\'eba}{\f1  "lonely" }{\i\f1 (ERE, LT1:269). }{\b\f1 Eress\'eba}{\f1  "Lonely (One)", often used by itself for }{\b\f1 Tol Eress\'eba}{\f1 , the Lonely Isle }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
. In early "Qenya", }{\b\f1 eress\'eb}{\f1  was an adjective or adverb: "singly, only, alone" }{\i\f1 (LT1:269)}{\f1 , but in Tolkien's later Quenya it is a noun.
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b erinqua}{ "single, alone" (VT42:10)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Erintion}{\f1  second half of the month of }{\b\f1 avestalis}{\f1  (January) }{\i\f1 (LT1:252)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab erma}{\f1  "physical matter" }{\i\f1 (MR:338, 470)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Erquell\'eb}{\f1  alternative name of September }{\i\f1 (PM:135)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Err\'edv\'eb}{\f1  alternative name of November }{\i\f1 (PM:135)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ertuil\'eb}{\f1  alternative name of April }{\i\f1 (PM:135)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Eru}{\f1  "the One", God, a name reserved for the most solemn occasions }{\i\f1 (WJ:402)}{\f1 , genitive }{\b\f1 Eruo}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (MR:329)}{\f1 . Compounds: }{\b\f1 Eruhantal\'eb}{\f1  "Thanksgiving to Eru", a N\'famen\'f3rean festival }{
\i\f1 (UT:166, 436)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Eruhin}{\f1  pl. }{\b\f1 Eruh\'edni}{\f1  "Children of Eru", Elves and Men }{\i\f1 (WJ:403; SA:h\'edni}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 Erukyerm\'eb}{\f1  "Prayer to Eru", a N\'famen\'f3rean festival }{\i\f1 (UT:166, 436)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 
Erulaital\'eb}{\f1  "Praise of Eru", a N\'famen\'f3rean festival }{\i\f1 (UT:166, 436)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Erus\'e9n}{\f1  "the children of God" }{\i\f1 (RGEO:74; this is a weird form with no plural ending. The normal form seems to be }{\b\i\f1 Eruh\'edni}{
\i\f1 .)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Eruman}{\f1  desert north-east of Valinor }{\i\f1 (ERE)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab erum\'eb}{\f1  "desert" }{\i\f1 (ERE)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab er\'fam\'eba}{\f1  "outer, outermost" }{\i\f1 (LT1:262)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab erya}{\f1  "single, sole" }{\i\f1 (ERE)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab es}{\f1  unidentified word in the phrase }{\b\f1 es sorni heruion an!}{\f1  "the Eagles of the Lords are at hand" (SD:290); possibly an assimilated form of }{\b\f1 en}{\f1 , that may function as a kin
d of deitic particle here: *"Behold the Eagles..."
\par \tab [}{\b\f1 esc\'eb}{\f1 ] }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "rustle, noise of leaves"}{\i\f1  (EZGE)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ess\'eb}{\f1  (1) "name", also later name of tengwa 31, originally called }{\b\f1 \'e1r\'eb}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'e1z\'eb}{\f1 ). }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 . Pl. #}{\b\f1 essi}{\f1  in PM:339 and MR:470, gen.pl. }{#}{\b esseron}{
 "of names in the compound }{\b N\'f3messeron}{ (q.v.); we would rather have expected *}{\b ession}{, given the nom.pl. }{\b essi}{; perhaps #}{\b esser}{ is a valid alternative form.}{\f1  }{\b\f1 Essecarm\'eb}{\f1  "name-making" }{\i\f1 (MR:214, 470)}{
\f1 , Eldarin ceremony where the father announces the name of his child. }{\b\f1 Essecenta }{\i\f1 (-"kenta")}{\f1  *"Name-essay" (see }{\b\f1 centa}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (MR:415)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 Essecilm\'eb}{\f1 
 "name-choosing", an Eldarin ceremony where a child named him- or herself according to personal }{\b\f1 l\'e1maty\'e1v\'eb}{\f1  (q.v.) }{\i\f1 (MR:214, 471)}{\b\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 ess\'eb}{\f1  (2) "beginning" }{\i\f1 (ESE/ESET)}{\f1 . This entry was marked by a query in Etym, and a word in the appendices to LotR suggests that it was emended to *}{\i\f1 YESE/YESET}{\f1 
; we should therefore read *}{\b\f1 yess\'eb}{\f1  for }{\b\f1 ess\'eb}{\f1 .
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab ess\'eba}{\f1  ?"primary" }{\i\f1 (gloss not certainly legible)}{\f1 ; read probably *}{\b\f1 yess\'eba}{\f1  in LotR-style Quenya; see }{\b\f1 esta}{\f1  below }{\i\f1 (ESE/ESET)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab esta}{\f1  "first" }{\i\f1 (ESE/ESET)}{\f1 ; this entry was marked with a query. The word }{\b\f1 Yestar\'eb}{\f1  (q.v.) *"Firstday" in LotR suggests that we should read *}{\b\f1 yesta}{\f1  for }{\b\f1 esta}{\f1  and also prefix a }{\b\f1 y
}{\f1  to the other words derived from }{\i\f1 ESE/ESET}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 ess\'eb}{\f1  > *}{\b\f1 yess\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ess\'eba}{\f1  > *}{\b\f1 yess\'eba}{\f1 ). }{\b\f1 Estaness\'eb}{\f1  "the firstborn", read likewise *}{\b\f1 Yestaness\'eb}{\f1  (*}{
\b\f1 Yestanessi}{\f1 ?) - but in a later text, Tolkien used }{\b\f1 Minn\'f3nar}{\f1  (q.v.) for "the Firstborn" as a name of the Elves, and this form is to be preferred.}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab esta}{\f1 - "to name" }{\i\f1 (ES)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Est\'eb}{\f1  "Repose, Rest" }{\i\f1 (WJ:403, EZD\'ca, SED), }{\f1 only used as name of a Vali\'eb }{\i\f1 (WJ:404)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab estel}{\f1  "trust, hope" }{\i\f1 (WJ:318-319, MR:320)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab et}{\f1  "out" (+ ablative: "out of"); Also prefix}{\b\i\f1  }{\b\f1 et}{\f1 - "forth, out" }{\i\f1 (ET)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 ettuler}{\f1  *"are coming forth" (}{\b\f1 ettul}{\f1 - = }{\b\f1 et}{\f1  + }{\b\f1 tul}{\f1 -).}{\i\f1 
 (SD:290; read probably *}{\b\i\f1 ettulir}{\i\f1  or continuative *}{\b\i\f1 ett\'falar}{\i\f1  in Tolkien's later Quenya)}{\f1 . 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b eteminya}{ "prominent" }{\i (VT42:24)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab etsir}{\f1  "mouth of a river" }{\i\f1 (ET)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ett\'eb}{\f1  "outside" }{\i\f1 (ET)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ettel\'eb}{\f1  "outer lands" }{\i\f1 (ET)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ettelen}{\f1  [sic, misreading for *}{\b\f1 ettel\'eba}{\f1 ?] ?"foreign" }{\i\f1 (gloss not certainly legible)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (ET)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Etyangoldi}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("\'f1")}{\f1  "Exiled Noldor" }{\i\f1 (WJ:374). }{\f1 Sg. probably *}{\b\f1 Etyangol}{\f1  (*}{\b\f1 Etyangold}{\f1 -).
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ezel}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ezella}{\f1  "green" (in Vanyarin Quenya only). Adopted and adapted from Valarin. }{\i\f1 (WJ:399)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ezellohar}{\f1  "the Green Mound" where the Two Trees grew; adopted and adapted from Valarin; also translated as }{\b\f1 Coron Oiolair\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Corollair\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ:401)}{\f1 . The name must have become *}{\b\f1 Erellohar
}{\f1  in Exilic Quenya.
\par 
\par <F>
\par }{\b\f1 \tab faica}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "contemptible, mean" }{\i\f1 (SPAY)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab faila}{\f1  "fair-minded, just, generous" }{\i\f1 (PM:352)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab faina}{\f1 - "emit light" }{\i\f1 (PHAY)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab fainu}{\f1 - "release" }{\i\f1 (LT1:250)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 fair\'eb}{\i\f1  }{\f1 (1) "phantom, disembodied spirit, when seen as a pale shape" (pl. }{\b\f1 fairi}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 ); }{\b\f1 fair\'eb}{\f1  was also used = "spirit (in general)" }{
\i\f1 (MR:349)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab fair\'eb}{\f1  (2) "natural death" (as act) }{\i\f1 (PHIR)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 fair\'eb}{\f1  (3) "radiance" }{\i\f1 (PHAY)
\par }{\b\f1 fair\'eb}{\f1  (4) "free" }{\i\f1 (LT1:250) }{\f1 (use rather }{\b\f1 mirima}{\f1  in LotR-style Quenya)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab fairi\'eb}{\f1  "freedom" }{\i\f1 (LT1:250)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Falanyel}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 Falanyeld}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 Falanyeldi}{\f1 ) (in the pl.) a name of the Teleri }{\i\f1 (PHAL/PH\'c1LAS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab falas}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 falass}{\f1 -), }{\b\f1 falass\'eb}{\f1  "shore, beach" }{\i\f1 (LT1:253, LT2:339)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 falass\'eb}{\f1  "shore, line of surf" }{\i\f1 (SA:falas)}{\f1 , "beach" }{\i\f1 (PHAL/PH\'c1LAS)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Falass\'eb
 N\'fam\'eba}{\f1  "Western Surf" }{\i\f1 (LT1:253)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab falasta}{\f1 - "to foam", participle }{\b\f1 falastala}{\f1  "foaming, surging" in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab falastan\'eb}{\f1  "surging", }{\b\f1 falastan\'e9ro}{\f1  "was loud with surf" }{\i\f1 (MC:213, 220; this is "Qenya" - the participle "surging" is }{\b\i\f1 falastala}{\i\f1  in Tolkien's later Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Falastur}{\f1  masc. name, *"Shore-lord" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab fall\'eb}{\f1  "foam" }{\i\f1 (PHAL/PH\'c1LAS)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab falma}{\f1  "(crested/foaming) wave" }{\i\f1 (PHAL/PH\'c1LAS)}{\f1 ; partitive pl. allative }{\b\f1 falmalinnar}{\f1  "on the foaming waves" in }{\i\f1 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Nam, RGEO:67)}{\f1 . In }{\b\f1 Falmari}{\f1 
, a name of the Teleri, and }{\b\f1 Mar-nu-Falmar}{\f1 , "Home/Land under Waves", a name of N\'famenor after the Downfall. }{\i\f1 (SA:falas)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 Falmari}{\f1  "wave-folk", a name of the Teleri }{\i\f1 (PM:386)}{\f1 . -In earlier "Qenya", }{
\b\f1 falma}{\f1  was glossed "foam" }{\i\f1 (LT1:253, cf. MC:213)}{\f1 . Compare also the early "Qenya" words }{\b\f1 falmar}{\f1  "wave as it breaks" }{\i\f1 (LT1:253)}{\f1 , pl. }{\b\f1 falmari}{\f1  "waves" }{\i\f1 (MC:216)}{\b\f1 
\par \tab falmar}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 falmarin}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 falmarind}{\f1 - or simply }{\b\f1 falmarin}{\f1 - as in pl. }{\b\f1 falmarindi}{\f1  [or }{\b\f1 falmarini}{\f1 ]) "sea-spirit, nymph"}{\i\f1  (PHAL/PH\'c1LAS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab falqua}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "cleft, mountain pass, ravine" }{\i\f1 (LT2:341)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab falquan}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "large sword" }{\i\f1 (LT2:341)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab f\'e1na}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 f\'e1n\'eb}{\f1  (1) "white" (}{\i\f1 Markirya - }{\b\i\f1 f\'e1n\'eb}{\i\f1  as a sg. form in may be a misreading)}{\f1 , (2) }{\b\f1 f\'e1na}{\f1  "cloud" }{\i\f1 (SPAN). }{\f1 Cf.}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 fana}{\f1 
 the "veils" or "raiment" in which the }{\i\f1 Valar}{\f1  presented themselves to physical eyes, the bodies in which they were self-incarnated, usually in the shape of the bodies of Elves (and Men) }{\i\f1 (RGEO:74)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab fanga}{\f1  "beard"}{\i\f1  (SP\'c1NAG)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 fang\'eb}{\f1  "long beard" }{\i\f1 (GL:34)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Fantur}{\f1  "lord of cloud", surname of Mandos }{\i\f1 (SPAN, TUR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab fanya}{\f1  "(white) cloud" }{\i\f1 (SPAN; translated "sky" in FS)}{\f1 ; pl. }{\b\f1 fanyar }{\f1 in }{\i\f1 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Nam, RGEO:67)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Fanyamar}{\f1  "upper air" }{\i\f1 (SPAN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab fanyar\'eb}{\f1  "the skies" (not heaven or firmament - the upper airs and clouds). Note that despite its English gloss, }{\b\f1 fanyar\'eb }{\f1 is a singular word and therefore takes a singular adjective/participle, as in }{\b\f1 fanyar\'eb
 r\'facina}{\f1  "ruined skies" in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1  (see MC:220, note 8 for this translation)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab f\'e1r\'eb}{\f1  "sufficiency, plenitude, all that is wanted" }{\i\f1 (PHAR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab f\'e1r\'eba}{\f1  "enough"; }{\b\f1 uf\'e1r\'eba}{\b\i\f1  }{\f1 "not enough" }{\i\f1 (FS). }{\f1 Etym has }{\b\f1 far\'eba}{\f1  "enough, sufficient" }{\i\f1 (PHAR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab farn\'eb}{\f1  "dwelling", in }{\b\f1 orofarn\'eb}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab farya}{\f1 - pa.t. }{\b\f1 farn\'eb}{\f1  "suffice" }{\i\f1 (PHAR)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 fas}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 fats\'eb}{\f1  "tassel" }{\i\f1 (GL:34)
\par \tab }{\b\f1 f\'e1s\'eb}{\f1  "gap, gulf" }{\i\f1 (GL:36)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab fass\'eb}{\f1  "tangled hair, shaggy lock" }{\i\f1 (PHAS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab fasta}{\f1 - "tangle" }{\i\f1 (PHAS)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 fatanyu}{\f1  "hell" }{\i\f1 (GL:51)
\par \tab }{\b\f1 fats\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 fas}{\f1  "tassel" }{\i\f1 (GL:34)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab fauca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "thirsty"}{\i\f1  (PHAU)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 fauta}{\f1 - "to snow" (actually glossed }{\b\f1 fauta}{\f1  = "it snows") }{\i\f1 (GL:35)
\par }{\b\f1 f\'e1w\'eb}{\f1  "snow" }{\i\f1 (GL:35)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Fayan\'e1ro}{\f1  archaic form of }{\b\f1 F\'eban\'e1ro}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (PM:343)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab f\'eba}{\f1  "spirit" (pl. }{\b\f1 f\'ebar}{\f1  attested, MR:363). The Incarnates are said to live by }{\i\f1 necessary}{\f1  union of }{\b\f1 hroa}{\f1  (body) and }{\b\f1 f\'eba}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ:405).}{\f1  In }{\b\f1 F\'ebanor}{\f1 
 (Quenya-Sindarin hybrid for pure Quenya }{\b\f1 F\'eban\'e1ro}{\f1  "Spirit of Fire"), }{\b\f1 F\'ebanturi}{\f1  "Masters of Spirits", name of the two Valar Mandos and L\'f3rien }{\i\f1 (SA:tur)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 f\'ebafelm\'eb}{\f1 
 "spirit-impulse" (impulses originating with the spirit, e.g. love, pity, anger, hate)}{\i\f1  (VT41:19 cf. 13)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab f\'ebal\'f3k\'eb}{\i\f1  }{\f1 "spark-dragon" }{\i\f1 (LOK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab F\'eban\'e1ro}{\f1  "Spirit of Fire", F\'ebanor }{\i\f1 (SA:n\'e1r, PHAY)}{\f1 . The word apparently includes the masculine ending -}{\b\f1 o}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab felya}{\f1  "cave" }{\i\f1 (PH\'c9LEG)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 felm\'eb}{\f1  "impulse, emotion" }{\i\f1 (VT41:19; this suggests a verb #}{\b\i\f1 fel}{\i\f1 - "to feel")}{\f1 . Compounded in }{\b\f1 f\'ebafelm\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 hroafelm\'eb}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab fenda}{\f1  "threshold" }{\i\f1 (PHEN)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 feng}{\f1 - "reed" }{\i\f1 (GL:34)}{\f1 . Some final vowel would obviously be required. Use rather }{\b\f1 lisc\'eb}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab fenum\'eb}{\f1  "dragon" }{\i\f1 (LT2:341 - but }{\b\i\f1 l\'f3k\'eb}{\i\f1  is the normal word in LotR-style Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab feren}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 fern}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 ferni}{\f1 ) "beech, beech-tree". Also }{\b\f1 fern\'eb}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (BER\'c9TH, PHER/PH\'c9REN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ferinya}{\f1  "beechen" }{\i\f1 (PHER/PH\'c9REN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ferna}{\f1  "mast, beechnuts" }{\i\f1 (PHER/PH\'c9REN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab fern\'eb}{\f1  "beech-tree" (pl. }{\b\f1 ferni}{\f1  given). Also }{\b\f1 feren}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (PHER/PH\'c9REN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab feuya}{\f1 - "feel disgust at, abhor"}{\i\f1  (PHEW)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab fif\'edru}{\f1 - is evidently the frequentative (see }{\b\f1 sis\'edla}{\f1 -) form of }{\b\f1 fir}{\f1 -; according to MC:223 it means "slowly fade away"; participle }{\b\f1 fif\'edrula}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1  (translated "fading")

\par }{\b\f1 \tab filit}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 filic}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1 , as in pl. }{\b\f1 filici}{\f1 )}{\i\f1  }{\f1 "small bird"}{\i\f1  (PHILIK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab finda}{\f1  "having hair, -haired" (the gloss "-haired" evidently means that }{\b\f1 finda}{\f1  may be used in compounds, like *}{\b\f1 carnifinda}{\f1  "red-haired") }{\i\f1 (PM:340)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Findar\'e1to}{\f1  *"Hair-champion", Sindarized as }{\i\f1 Finrod}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (SA:ar(a) )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab find\'eb}{\f1  (1) "hair" (especially of the head) }{\i\f1 (PM:340)}{\f1 , "a tress or plait of hair" }{\i\f1 (PM:345)}{\f1 , "tress, braid of hair, lock of hair"}{\i\f1  (SPIN) }{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 find\'eb}{\f1  (2) "cunning" (prob. noun) }{\i\f1 (LT1:253; this "Qenya" word is evidently obsoleted by # 1 above)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Findec\'e1no}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("-k\'e1no")}{\f1  *"Hair-commander"; Sindarized as }{\i\f1 Fingon}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (PM:344)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab findess\'eb}{\f1  "a head of hair, a person's hair as a whole" }{\i\f1 (PM:345)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab findl}{\f1  "lock of hair, tress" (but }{\b\f1 findil}{\f1  elsewhere - in LotR-style Quenya, no word can end in -}{\b\f1 dl}{\f1 ). }{\i\f1 (LT2:341)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab fin\'eb}{\f1  "a hair" }{\i\f1 (PM:340) }{\f1 or "larch"}{\i\f1  (SPIN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab fini\'eb}{\f1  "cunning" (prob. noun)  }{\i\f1 (LT1:253)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab finwa}{\f1  "sagacious" }{\i\f1 (LT1:253)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Finw\'eb}{\f1  masc. name, apparently displaying the frequent ending -}{\b\f1 w\'eb}{\f1  suffixed to a stem normally having to do with hair, but the name is obscure (see Tolkien's discussion in PM:340-341). Also in Etym }{\i\f1 (PHIN, WEG)}{
\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab fion}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 fiond}{\f1 - or simply }{\b\f1 fion}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 fiondi}{\f1  or }{\b\f1 fioni}{\f1 ) ?"hawk" (reading of gloss uncertain; according to Christopher Tolkien the 
most natural interpretation would be "haste", but this word would have no plural form) }{\i\f1 (PHI)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Fionw\'eb}{\f1  (name of a Maia; also called }{\b\f1 E\'f6nw\'eb}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (PHI, (WEG) )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab fir}{\f1 - "die, fade" (cf. }{\b\f1 fif\'edru}{\f1 -); aorist (?) }{\b\f1 f\'edr\'eb}{\f1  "expire"; augmentless perfect }{\b\f1 f\'edri\'eb}{\f1 , translated "she has breathed forth"}{\i\f1  }{\f1 
(but no explicit element meaning "she" seems to be present) }{\i\f1 (MR:250, 470)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab fir\'eb}{\f1  pl. }{\b\f1 firi}{\f1  "mortal man" }{\i\f1 (PHIR)}{\f1  ("Firi" is not clearly glossed and may also be the archaic form from which }{\i\f1 fir\'eb}{\f1  is derived, since word-final short *}{\i\f1 i}{\f1  became }{\i\f1 e}{\f1 
 in Quenya - but since we would rather expect the spelling *}{\i\f1 phiri}{\f1  if it were an archaic form, it is best taken as the pl. of }{\b\f1 fir\'eb}{\f1 .)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab F\'edriel}{\f1  "She that sighed" or "She that died", later name of }{\b\f1 M\'edriel}{\i\f1  (MR:250)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab f\'edrima}{\f1  "mortal" }{\i\f1 (PHIR)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 F\'edrima}{\f1  pl. }{\b\f1 F\'edrimar}{\f1  "those apt to die", "mortals", an Elvish name of Mortal Men }{\i\f1 (WJ:387)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 f\'edrimoin}{\f1  "for men", a dative pl. of }{
\b\f1 F\'edrimor}{\f1 , "mortals, Men", occurring in }{\i\f1 F\'edriel's Song}{\f1 . Tolkien later changed }{\b\f1 F\'edrimor}{\f1  to }{\b\f1 F\'edrimar}{\f1 , so the dative would probably be *}{\b\f1 f\'edrimain}{\f1  in Tolkien's later Quenya.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab firin}{\f1  "dead" (by natural cause) }{\i\f1 (PHIR)}{\f1 .}{\i\f1  }{\f1 This may obsolete the earlier "Qenya" word }{\b\f1 firin}{\f1  "ray of the sun" }{\i\f1 (LT2:341)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab firinga}{\f1  "carcanet, necklace" }{\i\f1 (LT2:346, GL:36)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Firya}{\f1  pl. }{\b\f1 Firyar}{\f1  "Mortals", an Elvish name of Mortal Men }{\i\f1 (WJ:387). }{\f1 Etym has }{\b\f1 firya}{\f1  "human", literally *"mortal" }{\i\f1 (PHIR)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Firyanor}{\f1  = }{\i\f1 Hild\'f3rien}{\f1 , the place where mortal men first awoke, like the Elves did at Cuivi\'e9nen }{\i\f1 (PHIR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab foa}{\f1  "hoard, treasure" }{\i\f1 (LT2:340)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab foal\'f3k\'eb }{\f1 "name of a serpent that guarded a treasure" }{\i\f1 (LT2:340)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab foina}{\f1  "hidden" }{\i\f1 (LT2:340)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab f\'f3l\'eb}{\f1  "secrecy, a secret" }{\i\f1 (LT2:340; "Qenya" spelling }{\b\i\f1 f\'f4l\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab f\'f3lima}{\f1  "secretive" }{\i\f1 (LT2:340; "Qenya" spelling }{\b\i\f1 f\'f4lima}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab formait\'eb}{\f1  "righthanded, dexterous" }{\i\f1 (PHOR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Formen}{\f1  "north" }{\i\f1 (SA:men)}{\f1 , also name of tengwa 10 }{\i\f1 (Appendix E, PHOR, MEN; replacing the rejected form }{\b\i\f1 Tormen}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 . In }{\b\f1 Formenos}{\f1  "Northern Fortress"}{\i\f1  (SA:formen)}{\f1 . 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab formenya}{\f1  "northern" }{\i\f1 (PHOR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Forostar}{\f1  the "Northlands" of N\'famenor }{\i\f1 (UT:165)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab forya}{\f1  "right" }{\i\f1 (PHOR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Fui}{\f1  "Night"}{\i\f1  (PHUY)}{\f1  - variant }{\b\f1 Hui}{\f1 , which is probably to be preferred in light of Tolkien's later insight that the related word }{\b\f1 fuin\'eb}{\f1 
 (see below) is actually Telerin, the proper Quenya form being }{\b\f1 huin\'eb}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab fuin\'eb}{\f1  "deep shadow" }{\i\f1 (PHUY; cf. "Qenya" }{\b\i\f1 fuin}{\i\f1  "night" in MC:221)}{\f1 . According to VT41:8, }{\b\f1 fuin\'eb}{\f1  is not a Quenya form at all, but Telerin for Quenya }{\b\f1 huin\'eb}{\f1  (but 
unquestionably, }{\b\f1 fuin\'eb}{\f1  is quoted as a Quenya form in certain earlier sources; cf. also }{\b\f1 Fuinur}{\f1  below - perhaps we may assume that }{\b\f1 fuin\'eb}{\f1  was borrowed into Quenya from Telerin and thus came to co-exist with }{
\b\f1 huin\'eb}{\f1 ?
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Fuinur}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (misprint "Fuinar" in the Silmarillion Index)}{\f1  masc. name, evidently derived from }{\b\f1 fuin\'eb}{\f1  "shadow" }{\i\f1 (Silm; cf. the stem PHUY in the Etymologies)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab f\'fam\'eb}{\f1  "sleep" (noun) }{\i\f1 (LT1:253)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab f\'famella}{\f1  "poppy" (also }{\b\f1 f\'famellot}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (LT1:253)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab f\'famellot}{\f1  "poppy" (also }{\b\f1 f\'famella}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (LT1:253)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab fur}{\f1 - "to conceal, to lie" }{\i\f1 (LT2:340)}{\f1  Read perhaps *}{\b\f1 hur}{\f1 - in a LotR-compatible form of Quenya, since Tolkien later decided that }{\b\f1 fu}{\f1 - tended to become }{\b\f1 hu}{\f1 -.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab furin}{\f1  "hidden, concealed" (also }{\b\f1 hurin}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (LT2:340)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab furu}{\f1  "a lie" }{\i\f1 (LT2:340, GL:36) }{\f1 Read perhaps *}{\b\f1 hur}{\f1 - in a LotR-compatible form of Quenya, since Tolkien later decided that }{\b\f1 fu}{\f1 - tended to become }{
\b\f1 hu}{\f1 -.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 
\par <H>
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 haca}{\f1 - "squat" }{\i\f1 (GL:47)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab h\'e1cala}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "yawning", a participle occurring in the }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1  poem, derived from an (otherwise unattested) verb #}{\b\f1 hac}{\f1 - "yawn".
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 hacca}{\f1  "buttocks, hams" }{\i\f1 (GL:47)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab hahta}{\f1  "pile, mound" }{\i\f1 (KHAG)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab haim\'eb}{\f1  "habit" }{\i\f1 (KHIM)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab haira}{\f1  "remote, far" (adj.) }{\i\f1 (KHAYA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab haiya}{\f1  "far" }{\i\f1 (SD:247)}{\f1 . Also }{\b\f1 h\'e1ya}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hala}{\f1  "(small) fish" }{\i\f1 (KHAL}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 , SKAL}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab halatir}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 halatirn}{\f1 -, as in dat.sg. }{\b\f1 halatirnen}{\f1 ), also }{\b\f1 halatirno}{\f1 , "kingsfisher", etymologically "fish-watcher" }{\i\f1 (TIR, SKAL}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 , KHAL}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab halcin}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "frozen" }{\i\f1 (LT1:254)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab halda}{\f1  "veiled, hidden, shadowed, shady" (opposed to }{\b\f1 helda}{\f1  "stripped bare") }{\i\f1 (SKAL}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab halla}{\f1  "tall" }{\i\f1 (Appendix E, footnote)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab haloisi }{\f1 "the sea (in storm)", cf. }{\b\f1 haloit\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (LT1:254)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab haloit\'eb}{\f1  "leaping" }{\i\f1 (LT1:254)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab halta}{\f1 - "to leap" }{\i\f1 (LT1:254)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab halya}{\f1 - "veil, conceal, screen from light" }{\i\f1 (SKAL}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ham}{\f1 - (1) "sit" }{\i\f1 (KHAM)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 #}{\b\f1 ham}{\f1 - (2) "judge", attested in the aorist form }{\b hamil}{ "you judge".}{\i  (VT42:33; notice the ending -}{\b\i l}{\i  "you". See }{\b\i nem\'eb}{\i . The verb #}{\b\i ham}{\i 
- with the meaning "judge" may seem to be an ephemeral form in Tolkien's conception.)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab handa}{\f1  "understanding, intelligent" }{\i\f1 (KHAN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab handass\'eb}{\f1  "intelligence" }{\i\f1 (KHAN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hand\'eb}{\f1  "knowledge, understanding, intelligence" }{\i\f1 (KHAN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hantal\'eb}{\f1  "thanksgiving", isolated from }{\b\f1 Eruhantal\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (UT:166)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hant\'eb}{\f1  pa.t. of }{\b\f1 hat}{\i\f1 -}{\f1  "break asunder" }{\i\f1 (SKAT)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hanu}{\f1  "a male (of Men or Elves), male animal" }{\i\f1 (3AN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hanuvoit\'eb}{\f1  ?"male" (prob. adj.) }{\i\f1 (INI)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hanwa}{\f1  "male"}{\i\f1  (INI)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hanya}{\f1 - "understand, know about, be skilled in dealing with"}{\i\f1  (KHAN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab har}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 har\'eb}{\f1  "near" }{\i\f1 (LT1:253)}{\f1 
\par \tab #}{\b\f1 har}{\f1 - "sit", pl. present }{\b\f1 h\'e1rar}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 CO}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 i h\'e1rar}{\f1  "those who sit, those who are sitting")}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab haran}{\f1  (#}{\b\f1 harn}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 harni}{\f1 ) "king, chieftain"}{\i\f1  (3AR, T\'c2/TA3 - for "king", the word }{\b\i\f1 aran}{\i\f1  is to be preferred in LotR-style Quenya)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab harany\'eb}{\f1  last year of a century in the N\'famen\'f3rean calendar (or possibly the word for "century" itself; Tolkien's wording is unclear) }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab harda}{\f1  (not glossed, evidently a variant of }{\b\f1 arda}{\f1  "realm") }{\i\f1 (EN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab harma}{\f1  (1) "treasure, a treasured thing" }{\i\f1 (3AR)}{\f1 , also name of tengwa 11, later called }{\b\f1 aha}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 . 
\par \tab [}{\b\f1 harma}{\f1  (2) "wolf" }{\i\f1 (3ARAM)}{\f1 ]
\par \tab [}{\b\f1 Harmen}{\f1 ] "south" }{\i\f1 (MEN)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Changed to }{\b\i\f1 hyarmen}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab harna}{\f1  "wounded"; }{\b\f1 harna}{\f1 - "to wound" }{\i\f1 (SKAR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab harw\'eb}{\f1  (1) "wound" }{\i\f1 (SKAR)}{\f1 , (2) "treasure, treasury" }{\i\f1 (3AR)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Use rather }{\b\i\f1 harma}{\i\f1  for "treasure".)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab harya}{\f1 - "possess" }{\i\f1 (3AR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab haryon}{\f1  "(heir), prince" }{\i\f1 (3AR)}{\f1 
\par \tab #}{\b\f1 hasta}{\f1 - "mar"}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (verbal stem isolated from the past participle }{\b\i\f1 hastaina}{\i\f1  "marred"). -MR:254}{\f1  
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hat}{\f1 - "break asunder", pa.t. }{\b\f1 hant\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (SKAT)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hauta}{\f1 - "cease, take a rest, stop" }{\i\f1 (KHAW)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab h\'e1ya}{\f1  "far off, far away" (adj.) }{\i\f1 (KHAYA)}{\f1 . Also }{\b\f1 haiya}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab heca!}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "be gone! stand aside!", also with pronominal suffixes }{\b\f1 hecat}{\f1  sg. and }{\b\f1 hecal}{\f1  pl. }{\i\f1 (WJ:364)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Hecel}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 Heceld}{\f1 -, e.g. pl. }{\b\f1 Heceldi}{\f1 , WJ:371) = }{\b\f1 hecil}{\f1 , q.v., but reformed to match }{\b\f1 Oarel}{\f1 , especially applied to the Eldar left in Beleriand. }{\b\f1 Helcelmar}{\f1 
 and }{\b\f1 Heceldamar}{\f1  *"Land of Forsaken Elves", the name used by the loremasters of Aman for Beleriand. }{\i\f1 (WJ:365)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hecil}{\i\f1  ("k")}{\f1  (masc. }{\b\f1 hecilo}{\f1 , fem. }{\b\f1 hecil\'eb}{\f1 ) "one lost or forsaken by friends, waif, outcast, outlaw" }{\i\f1 (WJ:365)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hehta}{\f1 - (pa.t. }{\b\f1 hehtan\'eb}{\f1 ) "put aside, leave out, exclude, abandon, forsake" }{\i\f1 (WJ:365)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab helca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "icy, icecold" (misprint "helk" in the Etymologies, stem }{\i\f1 KHELEK}{\f1 ; both the }{\i\f1 Silmarillion}{\f1  Appendix and LT1:254 have }{\i\f1 helka}{\f1 ). In }{\b\f1 Helcar}{\f1 
, the Inland Sea in the north-east of Middle-earth, and }{\b\f1 Helcarax\'eb}{\f1 , the Grinding Ice between Araman and Middle-earth}{\i\f1  (SA; spelt "Helkarakse" in the }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1 , stem KARAK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab helc\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "ice"}{\i\f1  (KHELEK, LT1:254) }{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx709\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab helcelimb\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  *"ice-drop"? }{\i\f1 (LIB}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 , cf. KHELEK)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab helda}{\f1  "naked, stripped bare" }{\i\f1 (SKEL, SKAL}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab helin}{\f1  "violet" or "pansy" }{\i\f1 (LT1:262)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Helinyetill\'eb }{\f1 "Eyes of Heartsease", a name of the pansy }{\i\f1 (LT1:262)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hell\'eb}{\f1  "sky" }{\i\f1 (3EL; a distinct word }{\b\i\f1 hell\'eb}{\i\f1  "frost" was struck out, see KHEL.)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab helma}{\f1  "skin, fell" }{\i\f1 (SKEL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab helta}{\f1 - "strip" }{\i\f1 (SKEL)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (This word must be Q rather than S, since in S }{\b\i\f1 t}{\i\f1  would become }{\b\i\f1 th}{\i\f1  following }{\b\i\f1 l}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab helwa}{\f1  "(pale) blue" }{\i\f1 (3EL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab helyanw\'eb}{\f1  "rainbow", lit. "sky-bridge"}{\i\f1  (3EL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hen}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 hend}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 hendi}{\f1 ) "eye"}{\i\f1  (KHEN-D-E)}{\f1 ; possibly dual #}{\b\f1 hendu}{\f1  in }{\b\f1 hendumaica}{\f1 , q.v. }{\b\f1 Henulca}{\f1  "evileyed" }{\i\f1 (SD:68)}{\f1 ; cf. }{\b\f1 ulca}{\f1 
. 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 hendumaica}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "sharp-eye" (read *"sharp-eyed"?) }{\i\f1 (WJ:337)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hequa}{\f1  "leaving aside, not counting, excluding, except" }{\i\f1 (WJ:365)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 h\'e9r}{\f1  "lord" }{\i\f1 (VT41:9)}{\f1 , also }{\b\f1 heru}{\f1 , q.v.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab h\'e9ra}{\f1  "chief, principal" }{\i\f1 (KHER)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab h\'e9r\'eb}{\f1  "lordship" }{\i\f1 (LT1:272)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab heren}{\f1  (1) "order"; }{\b\f1 Heren Istarion}{\f1  "Order of Wizards" }{\i\f1 (UT:388)}{\f1 ; (2) "fortune" etymologically "governance" ("and so what is in store for one and what one has in store")}{\i\f1  (KHER)}{\b\i\f1  }{\b\f1 Herendil
}{\f1  masc. name *"Fortune-friend" = }{\i\f1 Eadwine}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 Edwin}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 Audoin}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (LR:52, 56, cf. the }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1 , stems KHER-, NIL/NDIL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab herenya}{\f1  "fortunate, wealthy, blessed, rich"}{\i\f1  (KHER)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab heri}{\f1  "lady" }{\i\f1 (KHER, LT1:272)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab h\'e9rinc\'eb}{\i\f1  ("k")}{\f1  *"little lady" }{\i\f1 (UT:195)}{\f1 . Concerning the diminutive ending, cf. }{\b\f1 Atarinc\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 cirinci}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab heru}{\f1  (also }{\b\f1 h\'e9r}{\f1 ) "lord, master" }{\i\f1 (PM:210, KHER, LT1:272)}{\f1 ; Letters:283 gives }{\b\f1 h\'e9r}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 heru}{\f1 ). In names like }{\b\f1 Herumor}{\f1  *"Black Lord" and }{\b\f1 Herun\'famen}{\f1 
 "Lord of the West" }{\i\f1 (SA:heru)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 heruion}{\f1  evidently a gen.pl. of }{\b\f1 heru}{\f1  "lord": *"of the lords" (SD:290); }{\b\f1 herun\'famen}{\f1  "Lord-of-West" (LR:47), title of Manw\'eb
\par }{\b\f1 \tab heru}{\f1 - "to rule" }{\i\f1 (LT1:272; rather }{\b\i\f1 tur}{\i\f1 - in LotR-style Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Hescin}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "winter one" (???) }{\i\f1 (LT1:255)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Hesin}{\f1  "winter" }{\i\f1 (LT1:255; LotR-style Quenya has }{\b\i\f1 hr\'edv\'eb}{\i\f1  instead)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hessa}{\f1  "dead, withered" }{\i\f1 (LT1:255)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hesta}{\f1  "wither" }{\i\f1 (LT1:255)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hilcin}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  is glossed "it freezes" }{\i\f1 (LT1:254)}{\f1 ; if this word is to be adapted to LotR-style Quenya, it would have to
 mean "I freeze", but the shape of this word seems somewhat alien to Tolkien's later forms of Quenya (verbs with 1st person aorists in -}{\b\f1 in}{\f1  never have a consonant cluster immediately preceding this ending)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hildi}{\f1 , -}{\b\f1 hildi}{\f1  "followers" (used = mortal men, the Second-born of Il\'favatar) }{\i\f1 (KHIL)}{\f1  (also }{\b\f1 Hildor}{\f1 , q.v.). Dat. pl. }{\b\f1 hildin}{\f1  "for men", a dative pl. occurring in }{\i\f1 F\'ed
riel's Song}{\f1 . Cf. }{\b\f1 hildinyar}{\f1  "my heirs", evidently *}{\b\f1 hild\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 hildo}{\f1  "follower, heir" + -}{\b\f1 inya}{\f1  "my" + -}{\b\f1 r}{\f1  plural ending (}{\i\f1 EO}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Hildor}{\f1  "the Followers", an Elvish name of Mortal Men as the Second-born of Il\'favatar }{\i\f1 (WJ:387)}{\f1 ; sg #}{\b\f1 Hildo}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Hild\'f3rien}{\f1  the land where Men first awoke, like the Elves did at Cuivi\'e9nen}{
\i\f1  (Silm, KHIL, PHIR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hilya}{\f1 - "to follow"}{\i\f1  (KHIL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab himba}{\f1  "adhering, sticking" }{\i\f1 (KHIM)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab himya}{\f1 - "to stick to, cleave to, abide by"}{\i\f1  (KHIM)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab h\'edna}{\f1  "child", also }{\b\f1 hina}{\f1  used in the vocative to a (young) child (also }{\b\f1 hinya}{\f1  "my child", for }{\b\f1 hinanya}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (WJ:403)}{\f1 . Pl. }{\b\f1 h\'edni}{\f1  (surprisingly not **}{\b\f1 h\'ednar}{
\f1 ) in }{\b\f1 H\'edni Il\'favataro}{\f1  "Children of Il\'favatar" }{\i\f1 (Silmarillion Index}{\f1 ). In compounds -}{\b\f1 hin}{\f1  pl. -}{\b\f1 h\'edni}{\f1  (as in }{\b\f1 Eruh\'edni}{\f1 , "Children of Eru", }{\i\f1 SA:h\'edni}{\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hir}{\f1 - "find", future tense }{\b\f1 hiruva}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 hiruvaly\'eb}{\f1  "thou shalt find") (}{\i\f1 Nam, RGEO:67)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Hirilond\'eb}{\f1  "Haven-finder", name of a ship }{\i\f1 (UT:192)}{\f1 

\par }{\b\f1 \tab h\'eds\'eb}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) (1) "mist, fog"}{\i\f1  (KHIS/KHITH)}{\f1 . Earlier "Qenya" words, probably obsoleted by this word: (2) "dusk" }{\i\f1 (LT1:255)}{\f1 , (3) "blinking" (?) }{\i\f1 (MC:214)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab h\'edsen}{\f1  "of mist" (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (MC:221; this may be "Qenya", but it connects with }{\b\i\f1 h\'eds\'eb}{\i\f1 .)}{\b\f1 
\par \tab h\'edsi\'eb}{\f1  "mist" (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (Nam, SA:h\'eeth)}{\f1 ; also }{\b\f1 h\'eds\'eb}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab H\'edsil\'f3m\'eb}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) (place-name) "Hithlum" }{\i\f1 (SA:h\'eeth, LUM)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab H\'edsilumb\'eb}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) (place-name, variant of H\'edsil\'f3m\'eb) }{\i\f1 (LUM)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab H\'edsim\'eb}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) eleventh month of the year, "November" }{\i\f1 (Appendix D, SA:h\'eeth)}{\f1 . The Quenya word seems to mean "Misty One".
\par }{\b\f1 \tab histan\'eb}{\f1  "fading" }{\i\f1 (MC:213; this is "Qenya") }{\b\f1 
\par \tab hist\'eb}{\f1  "dusk" }{\i\f1 (LT1:255)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hiswa}{\f1  "grey" }{\i\f1 (KHIS/KHITH, Narqelion)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hisw\'eb}{\f1  "fog" }{\i\f1 (KHIS/KHITH)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hlapu}{\f1 - "blow; fly or stream in the wind", participle }{\b\f1 hl\'e1pula}{\f1  "blowing" in }{\i\f1 Markirya
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hlar}{\f1 - "hear", future tense }{\b\f1 hlaruva}{\f1  "shall hear" in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b hloa}{ }{\i ("hlo\'e4")}{ noun that "would have been" the product of primitive }{\i sloga}{ (Sindarin }{\i lh\'f4}{
), a word used of rivers that were "variable and liable to overflow their banks at seasons". However, the wording "would have been" may seem to suggest that this word did not actually occur in Quenya. }{\i (VT42:9)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab hl\'f3c\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "snake, serpent", later }{\b\f1 l\'f3c\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (SA:lok-)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hloni}{\f1  "sounds" (sg. *}{\b\f1 hlon\'eb}{\f1 ? *}{\b\f1 hlon}{\f1 ? *}{\b\f1 hl\'f3n}{\f1 ?) }{\i\f1 (WJ:394)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab #hlon\'edt\'eb}{\f1  "phonetic", only attested in the pl. in the phrase }{\b\f1 hlon\'edti tengwi}{\f1  "phonetic signs" (sg. #}{\b\f1 hlon\'edt\'eb tengw\'eb}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (WJ:395)}{\f1 . The form #}{\b\f1 hlon\'edt\'eb }{\f1 
was changed by Tolkien from }{\b\f1 hlonait\'eb}{\f1 , as in }{\b\f1 hlonait\'eb tengwesta}{\f1  "a tengwesta (q.v.) employing phonetic signs" }{\i\f1 (VT39:4)}{\f1 ,}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 hlonaiti tengwi}{\f1  "phonetic signs" }{\i\f1 (VT39:4)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ho}{\f1  "from" }{\i\f1 (3O)}{\f1 ; cf. }{\b\f1 h\'f3}{\f1 -
\par }{\b\f1 \tab h\'f3}{\f1 - verbal prefix; "away, from, from among", the point of view being outside the thing, place, or group in thought }{\i\f1 (WJ:368)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab h\'f3ciri}{\f1 - "cut off" (cut of a required portion, so as to have it or use it) }{\i\f1 (WJ:366, 368) }{\f1 (Normal aorist probably *}{\b\f1 h\'f3cir\'eb}{\f1 , present/continuative tense *}{\b\f1 h\'f3c\'edra}{\f1 , past tense }{\b\f1 h
\'f3cirn\'eb}{\f1 ) 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab holm\'eb}{\f1  "odour" }{\i\f1 (\'d1OL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab h\'f3n}{\f1  "heart" (physical) }{\i\f1 (KH\'d4-N)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 hon-maren}{\f1  "heart of the house", a fire }{\i\f1 (LR:63, 73; this is "Qenya" with genitive in -}{\b\i\f1 en}{\i\f1 , not -}{\b\i\f1 o }{\i\f1 
as in LotR-style Quenya - read *}{\b\i\f1 hon-maro}{\i\f1 ?)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hondo-ninya}{\f1  "my heart", changed to }{\b\f1 indo-ninya}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (FS, earlier version)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab h\'f3pa}{\f1  "haven, harbour, small landlocked bay" }{\i\f1 (KHOP)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hopass\'eb}{\f1  "harbourage" }{\i\f1 (KHOP)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab h\'f3r\'eb}{\f1  "impulse" }{\i\f1 (KHOR)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 h\'f3r\'eba}{\f1  "impulsion" }{\i\f1 (KHOR)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (should probably mean *"impulsive" instead; Christopher Tolkien may have misread the gloss)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab horma}{\f1  "horde, host" }{\i\f1 (LT2:341)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab horm\'eb}{\f1  "urgency" (confused with }{\b\f1 orm\'eb }{\f1 "rushing") }{\i\f1 (KHOR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab horta}{\f1 - "send flying, speed, urge" }{\i\f1 (KHOR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hortal\'eb}{\f1  "speeding, urging" }{\i\f1 (KHOR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hos}{\f1  "folk" }{\i\f1 (LT2:340)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hoss\'eb}{\f1  "army, band, troop" }{\i\f1 (LT2:340)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hosta}{\f1  "gather, collect, assemble" (}{\i\f1 Markirya)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 hostaini\'e9va}{\f1  "will be gathered", future tense of the stative verb *}{\b\f1 hostaini\'eb}{\f1 , derived from *}{\b\f1 hostaina}{\f1 
 "gathered", past participle of }{\b\f1 hosta}{\f1 - "gather". Such stative verbs are probably not conceptually valid in Tolkien's later Quenya; see -}{\b\f1 i\'eb}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (FS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hosta}{\f1  "large number", verb }{\b\f1 hosta}{\f1 - "to collect" }{\i\f1 (KHOTH)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hostar }{\f1 "tribe" }{\i\f1 (LT2:340)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Hravani}{\f1  "the Wild" (sg. *}{\b\f1 hravan}{\f1 ), name of non-Edain Men }{\i\f1 (WJ:219)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hr\'e1v\'eb}{\f1  "flesh" }{\i\f1 (MR:349)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hresta}{\f1  "shore, beach", ablative }{\b\f1 hrestallo}{\f1  *"from (the) shore" in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hr\'edv\'eb}{\f1  "winter", in the calendar of Imladris a precisely defined period of 72 days, but also used without any exact definition }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hroa}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (sometimes spelt "hr\'f6a")}{\f1  "body" (changed by Tolkien from }{\b\f1 hrondo}{\f1 , in turn changed from }{\b\f1 hr\'f3n}{\f1 ). Pl. }{\b\f1 hroar}{\f1  is attested }{\i\f1 (MR:304, VT39:30)}{\f1 
. In MR:330, Tolkien notes that }{\b\f1 hroa }{\f1 is "roughly but not exactly equivalent to 'body' " (as opposed to "soul"). The Incarnates live by }{\i\f1 necessary}{\f1  union of }{\b\f1 hroa}{\f1  (body) and }{\b\f1 f\'eba}{\f1  (soul) }{\i\f1 
(WJ:405)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Hroafelm\'eb}{\f1  "body-impulse" (impulses provided by the body, e.g. physical fear, hunger, thirst, sexual desire) }{\i\f1 (VT41:19 cf. 13)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hr\'f3ta}{\f1  "dwelling underground, artificial cave or rockhewn hall" }{\i\f1 (PM:365)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab huan}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 h\'fan}{\f1 -, as in dat. sg. }{\b\f1 h\'fanen}{\f1 ) "hound" }{\i\f1 (KHUGAN, KHUG)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Hui}{\f1  "Night" }{\i\f1 (PHUY)}{\f1 , in earlier "Qenya" defined as "evening" }{\i\f1 (MC:214) }{\f1 or}{\i\f1  }{\f1 "fog, dark, murk, night" }{\i\f1 (LT1:253).
\par }{\b\f1 \tab huin\'eb}{\f1  "deep shadow"}{\i\f1  (PHUY)}{\f1 , "gloom" }{\i\f1 (VT41:8)}{\f1 , "gloom, darkness" }{\i\f1 (SA:fuin)}{\f1 , also used for "shadow" = Sauron }{\i\f1 (LR:56)}{\f1 . In earlier sources, }{\b\f1 huin\'eb}{\f1 
 is quoted as a variant of }{\b\f1 fuin\'eb}{\f1 , but according to VT41:8, }{\b\f1 huin\'eb}{\f1  is the proper Quenya form and }{\b\f1 fuin\'eb}{\f1  is Telerin.}{\i\f1  }{\f1 With prefix }{\b\f1 nu}{\f1 - "under" and allative ending -}{\b\f1 nna}{\f1 
 in }{\b\f1 nuhuinenna}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (SD:246)}{\f1 ; also }{\b\f1 unuhuin\'eb}{\f1  "under-shadow" }{\i\f1 (LR:47)}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab huiva}{\f1  "murky" }{\i\f1 (LT1:253)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab h\'fanen}{\f1  dat. sg. of }{\b\i\f1 huan}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (KHUGAN, KHUG)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab huo}{\f1  "dog" }{\i\f1 (KHUG, see KHUGAN) 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Huor\'eb}{\f1  "Heart-vigour" (masc. name) }{\i\f1 (KH\'d4-N)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hurin}{\f1  "hidden, concealed" (also }{\b\f1 furin}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (LT2:340)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab h\'faro }{\f1 "storm" }{\i\f1 (MC:214; this is "Qenya") }{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hwan}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 hwand}{\f1 -, e.g. pl. }{\b\f1 hwandi}{\f1 ) "sponge, fungus"}{\i\f1  (SWAD)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hwarin}{\f1  "crooked" }{\i\f1 (SKWAR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hwarma}{\f1  "crossbar"}{\i\f1  (SKWAR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hwerm\'eb}{\f1  "gesture-code" }{\i\f1 (WJ:395, VT39:5)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hwesta}{\f1  "breeze, breath, puff of air" }{\i\f1 (SWES)}{\f1 , also name of tengwa 12 }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 hwesta sindarinwa}{\f1  "Grey-elven }{\i\f1 hw}{\f1 ", name of tengwa 34 }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 . Verb }{\b\f1 
hwesta}{\f1 - "to puff" }{\i\f1 (SWES)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hwind\'eb}{\f1  "eddy, whirlpool" }{\i\f1 (SWIN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hwinya}{\f1 - "to swirl, eddy, gyrate" }{\i\f1 (SWIN)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 hy\'e1}{\f1  "here by us" }{\i\f1 (hardly a valid word in LotR-style Quenya)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Narqelion, QL:xiv)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hyalma}{\f1  "shell, conch, horn of Ulmo" }{\i\f1 (SYAL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hyanda}{\f1  "blade, share" }{\i\f1 (LT2:342)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hyapat}{\f1  "shore" }{\i\f1 (SKYAP)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hyar }{\f1 "plough" }{\i\f1 (LT2:342)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hyar}{\f1 - "cleave" (1st pers. aorist }{\b\f1 hyarin}{\f1  "I cleave") }{\i\f1 (SYAD)}{\f1 . Pa.t. perhaps *}{\b\f1 hyand\'eb}{\f1  since the R of }{\b\f1 hyar}{\f1 - was originally D; cf. }{\b\f1 rer}{\f1 - "sow", pa.t. }{\b\f1 rend\'eb}{
\f1 , from }{\i\f1 RED}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hyarmait\'eb}{\f1  "lefthanded"}{\i\f1  (KHYAR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hyarmen}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Hyarmen}{\f1  "south" }{\i\f1 (SA, SA:men, KHYAR)}{\f1 , also name of tengwa 33 }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 . In }{\b\f1 Hyarmendacil}{\f1  masc.name, "South-victor" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 , apparently also in }{\b\f1 
Hyarmentir}{\f1  (name of a mountain; the element -}{\b\f1 tir}{\f1  means *"watch[ing point]".) }{\i\f1 (SA) }{\b\f1 Hyarnustar}{\f1  "the Southwestlands" of N\'famenor; }{\b\f1 Hyarrostar}{\f1  the "Southeastlands" }{\i\f1 (UT:165)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hyarmenya}{\f1  "southern"}{\i\f1  (KHYAR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hyarya}{\f1  "left" }{\i\f1 (KHYAR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hyats\'eb}{\f1  "cleft, gash" }{\i\f1 (SYAD)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hyell\'eb}{\f1  "glass" }{\i\f1 (KHYEL(ES) )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab hy\'f3la}{\f1  "trump" }{\i\f1 (SD:419)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 i}{\f1  "the", indeclinable definite article }{\i\f1 (I, Nam}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 RGEO:67}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 WJ:369, WJ:398, MC:215, 216, 221; directly prefixed }{\b\i\f1 i}{\i\f1 - in }
{\b\i\f1 i-mar}{\i\f1  [FS], }{\b\i\f1 i-Ciryamo}{\i\f1  [UT:8] and }{\b\i\f1 i-aldar}{\i\f1  *"the trees" [Narqelion]}{\f1 ; }{\i\f1 with no hyphen in }{\b\i\f1 icilyanna}{\i\f1  = }{\b\i\f1 i cilyanna}{\i\f1  in SD:247)}{\f1 . Also relative pronoun: }{
\b\f1 i}{\f1  "the one/they who; (that) which" (both article and relative pronoun in }{\i\f1 CO}{\f1 : }{\b\f1 i Eru i or ily\'eb mahalmar \'eba}{\f1 : }{\i\f1 the}{\f1  One }{\i\f1 who}{\f1  is above all thrones", }{\b\f1 i h\'e1rar}{\f1  "}{\i\f1 
they who}{\f1  are sitting"); cf. also the phrase }{\b i hamil m\'e1ra}{ "(that) which you deem good" }{\i (VT42:33)}{. }{\f1 Note that before a verb, }{\b\f1 i}{\f1  means "the one who", or, in the case of a plural verb, "those who"; cf. }{\b\f1 
i carir quettar \'f3mainen}{\f1  "those who form words with voices" }{\i\f1 (WJ:391).}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 
\par <I>
\par }{\i\f1 \tab }{\f1 -}{\b\f1 i}{\f1  nominative plural ending regularly used on nouns ending in a consonant and in -}{\b\f1 \'eb}{\f1 ; in the latter case, }{\b\f1 -\'eb}{\f1  is displaced (}{\b\f1 Quend\'eb}{\f1  pl. }{\b\f1 Quendi}{\f1 ).
\par \tab [}{\b\f1 ia}{\f1  "ever" }{\i\f1 (GEY, EY); replaced by }{\b\i\f1 oia}{\i\f1 .}{\f1 ]
\par \tab [}{\b\f1 ial\'eb}{\f1  "everlasting" }{\i\f1 (GEY); replaced by }{\b\i\f1 oial\'eb}{\f1 ]
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 i\'eb}{\f1  (1) infinitive (or gerundial) ending, attested in }{\b\f1 enyali\'eb}{\f1 , q.v. }{\i\f1 (CO)
\par }{\f1 \tab -}{\b\f1 i\'eb}{\f1  (2) "is", -}{\b\f1 ier}{\f1  "are", stative verb suffix occurring in }{\i\f1 F\'edriel's Song:}{\f1  }{\b\f1 n\'famessier}{\f1  "they are in the west", }{\b\f1 meldielto}{\f1  "they are...beloved", }{\b\f1 talanti\'eb}{\f1 
 "he is fallen", }{\b\f1 m\'e1ri\'eb}{\f1  "it is good" (< *}{\b\f1 n\'famess\'eb}{\f1  "in the west", }{\b\f1 melda}{\f1  "beloved", *}{\b\f1 talanta}{\f1  "fallen"); future tense -}{\b\f1 i\'e9va}{\f1  in }{\b\f1 hostaini\'e9va}{\f1 
 "will be gathered" (< *}{\b\f1 hostaina}{\f1  "gathered"). Compare }{\b\f1 ye}{\f1  "is", }{\b\f1 y\'e9va}{\f1  "will be", verbs that also occur in }{\i\f1 F\'edriel's Song}{\f1 . This suffix is probably not valid in LotR-style Quenya: -}{\b\f1 i\'eb}{
\f1  is an infinitival or gerundial ending in }{\i\f1 CO}{\f1 , for }{\b\f1 ye}{\f1  "is" }{\i\f1 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\f1  has }{\b\f1 n\'e1}{\f1 , and the phrase "lost is" is }{\b\f1 vanwa n\'e1}{\f1 , not *}{\b\f1 vanwi\'eb}{\f1 .
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 iel}{\f1  patronymic (or matronymic) ending -"daughter" }{\i\f1 (YEL)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (In the }{\f1 Etymologies, }{\i\f1 Tolkien struck out this ending and the corresponding independent word }{\b\i\f1 yeld\'eb}{\i\f1  "daug
hter", changing them to -}{\b\i\f1 ien}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 yend\'eb}{\i\f1 . However, the ending -}{\b\i\f1 iel}{\i\f1  later turns up in the name }{\b\i\f1 Uin\'e9niel}{\i\f1 
 "Daughter of Uinen" in UT:182, so it would seem that Tolkien changed his mind again and restored this ending, and perhaps the noun }{\b\i\f1 yeld\'eb}{\i\f1  along with it.)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab il}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (prefix)}{\f1  "no, *un-" }{\i\f1 (LA)}{\f1 ; cf. }{\b\f1 ilfirin}{\f1  "immortal" (vs. }{\b\f1 firin}{\f1  "dead"). But }{\b\f1 il}{\f1 - can also mean "all, every"; see }{\b\f1 ilqua}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ilquen}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ilca}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "gleam (white)", participle }{\b\f1 ilcala}{\f1  with pl. allative ending }{\b\f1 ilcalannar }{\f1 in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 axor ilcalannar}{\f1  "on bones gleaming")
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'edl\'eb}{\f1  "star" }{\i\f1 (LT1:269; use rather }{\b\i\f1 elen}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 \'e9l}{\i\f1  in LotR-style Quenya.)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ilfirin}{\f1  "immortal" }{\i\f1 (PHIR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ilin}{\f1  "pale blue" }{\i\f1 (GLINDI)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ilkorin}{\f1  *"not of Kor"}{\i\f1  (LA, AR}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Illuin}{\f1  name of one of the Lamps of the Valar; apparently incorporating the element }{\b\f1 luin}{\f1  "blue" }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ilm}{\f1 - stem appearing in }{\b\f1 Ilmen}{\f1 , the region above the air where the stars are, in }{\b\f1 Ilmar\'eb}{\f1 , name of a Maia, and in }{\b\f1 Ilmarin}{\f1  "mansion of the high airs", the dwelling of Manw\'eb
 and Varda upon Oioloss\'eb }{\i\f1 (SA)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ilma}{\f1  "starlight" }{\i\f1 (GIL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ilmar\'eb}{\f1  "starlight", also name of a Maia }{\i\f1 (GIL, SA:ilm-)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ilmarin}{\f1  "mansion of the high airs", the dwelling of Manw\'eb and Varda upon Oioloss\'eb }{\i\f1 (SA:ilm-)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ilmen}{\f1  region above air where stars are}{\i\f1  (WIL, SA:ilm-)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Ilmen-assa}{\f1  "Chasm of Ilmen" }{\i\f1 (GAS)
\par }{\f1 \tab *}{\b\f1 ilpirin}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (hypothetical form; the word actually appears in Q as }{\b\i\f1 ilfirin}{\i\f1 )}{\f1  "immortal"}{\i\f1  (PHIR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ilqua}{\f1  (}{\i\f1 "ilqa")}{\f1  "everything" }{\i\f1 (IL)}{\f1 , "all"}{\i\f1  (FS)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 ilquainen}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("ilqainen")}{\f1  a word occurring in }{\i\f1 F\'edriel's Song}{\f1 , translated "to all". It would appear to be }{
\b\f1 ilqua}{\f1  "all" with a dative pl. ending. However, in Tolkien's later Quenya -}{\b\f1 inen}{\f1  is the ending for instrumental pl. }{\i\f1 (FS)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ilquen}{\f1  "everybody" }{\i\f1 (WJ:372)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ilsa}{\f1  "(the mystic name of) silver" }{\i\f1 (LT1:255,}{\f1  }{\i\f1 LT1:268)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ilu}{\f1  "(the) world" }{\i\f1 (FS, LR:47, 56)}{\f1 , "universe" }{\i\f1 (IL)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 ilu}{\f1  "everything, all, the whole" (of the universe also including God and all souls and spirits, which are not properly included in the term }{
\b\f1 E\'e4}{\f1 ; see VT39:20)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 ilucara}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "omnificent" }{\i\f1 (VT39:20)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 iluisa}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ?) "omniscient" }{\i\f1 (VT39:20)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Ilum\'edr\'eb}{\f1  *"World-jewel", another word for Silmaril }{\i\f1 (IL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab iluquinga}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "rainbow" }{\i\f1 (LT2:348)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ilurambar}{\f1  "Walls of the World" }{\i\f1 (IL, RAMB\'c2)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 il\'favala}{\f1  "omnipotent" }{\i\f1 (VT39:20)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Il\'favatar}{\f1  "All-father", God }{\i\f1 (SD:401, FS, IL; }{\b\f1 Il\'fav-atar}{\i\f1 , ATA)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Il\'favat\'e1ren}{\f1  "of Il\'favatar"; in the "Qenya" of }{\i\f1 F\'edriel's Song}{\f1 
, }{\i\f1 LR:47}{\f1  and }{\i\f1 SD:246}{\f1 , the genitive ending is -}{\b\f1 en}{\f1  instead of }{\b\f1 -o}{\f1  as in LotR-style Quenya. Cf. the later genitive }{\b\f1 Il\'favataro}{\f1  in the phrase }{\b\f1 H\'edni Il\'favataro}{\f1 
 "Children of Il\'favatar" in the Silmarillion Index.}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab il\'fav\'eb}{\f1  "allness, the all". In }{\b\f1 Il\'favatar}{\f1  "All-father". }{\i\f1 (SA; WJ:402, MR:471, IL) }{\f1 In MR:355, }{\b\f1 il\'fav\'eb}{\f1  seems to be equated with Heaven. Cf. SD:401: }{\b\f1 Il\'fav\'eb Ilu}{\f1 
 "Heaven, the universe, all that is (with and without the Earth)".}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ilw\'eb}{\f1  "sky, heavens" }{\i\f1 (LT1:255)}{\f1 , "the middle air among the stars" }{\i\f1 (LT1:273)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 Ilweran}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Ilweranta}{\f1  "rainbow" }{\i\f1 (GL:74)}{\f1  (The }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1  gives }{\b\f1 helyanw\'eb}{\f1 .)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab ilya}{\f1  "all" }{\i\f1 (LR:47, 56; SD:310)}{\f1 , "all, the whole" }{\i\f1 (IL)}{\f1 ; "each, every, all of a particular group of things" }{\i\f1 (VT39:20)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 ily\'eb}{\f1 
 before a plural noun, "all" being inflected like an adjective (}{\i\f1 Nam}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 RGEO:67)}{\f1 : }{\b\f1 ily\'eb tier }{\f1 "all paths" }{\i\f1 (Nam\'e1ri\'eb, VT39:20)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ily\'eb mahalmar}{\f1  "all thrones" (}{\i\f1 CO)}{\f1 

\par \tab -}{\b\f1 ima}{\f1  adjectival suffix. Sometimes it is used to derive simple adjectives, like }{\b\f1 vanima}{\f1  "fair" or }{\b\f1 calima}{\f1  "bright"; it can also take on the meaning "-able", as in }{\b\f1 \'faqu\'e9tima}{\f1 
 "unspeakable" (from }{\b\f1 quet}{\f1 - "speak"). Note that the stem-vowel is lengthened in the derivatives where -}{\b\f1 ima}{\f1  means "-able"). "X-ima" may mean "apt to X", as in }{\b\f1 F\'edrimar}{\f1  "mortals", literally "those apt to die" }{
\i\f1 (WJ:387)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Imbar}{\f1  "the Habitation, = Earth," also "the principal part of Arda" (= the Solar System) }{\i\f1 (MR:337, also WJ:419 note 29)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab imb\'eb}{\f1  "between" }{\i\f1 (Nam, RGEO:67)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'edmen}{\f1  a word occurring in }{\i\f1 F\'edriel's Song}{\f1 , translated "in them" (}{\b\f1 ar ilqua \'edmen}{\f1  "and all [that is] in them"). Probably not valid in LotR-style Quenya.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab in}{\f1  a strange particle occurring in the phrase }{\b\f1 i-coimas in-Eldaron}{\f1  "the coimas [lembas] of the Eldar" in PM:403. It looks like the Sindarin plural article, but in Quenya }{\b\f1 i}{\f1 
 is both sg. and pl. "the", and the word }{\b\f1 Eldar }{\f1 does not normally take any article at all. The alternative reading }{\b\f1 i-coimas Eldaron}{\f1  (PM:395) is probably to be preferred.
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 in}{\f1  dative pl. ending, seen in }{\b\f1 eldain}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 f\'edrimoin}{\f1 , q.v.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab indi }{\f1 - apparently a name of Men, hardly valid in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\i\f1 (LT2:343)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab indil}{\f1  "lily", or other large single flower. Adopted and adapted from Valarin. }{\i\f1 (WJ:399)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab indis}{\f1  is translated "wife" in UT:8; but is assigned the meaning "bride" in other places; use rather }{\b\f1 vess\'eb}{\f1  for "wife". }{\b\f1 Indis}{\f1  "Bride", name of the goddess Nessa }{\i\f1 (NDIS-S\'ca/S\'c2 (NETH, NI}{
\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 , NDER, I) )}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Indis Nessa}{\f1  *"Bride Nessa", title and name of the Vali\'eb }{\i\f1 (NETH)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab indo }{\f1 "heart, mood"}{\i\f1  (ID, obsoleting earlier "Qenya" }{\b\i\f1 indo}{\i\f1  "house" in LT2:343)}{\f1 ; "state" (perhaps especially state of mind, given the other glosses) }{\i\f1 (VT39:23)}{\f1 . In a post-LotR source, }{\b\f1 
indo}{\f1  is translated "resolve" or "will", the state of mind leading directly to action }{\i\f1 (VT41:13)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Indo}{\f1  is thus "the mind in its purposing faculty, the will" }{\i\f1 (VT41:17)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Indo-ninya}{\b\i\f1  }{\f1 
a word occurring in }{\i\f1 F\'edriel's Song}{\f1 , translated "my heart".}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab indor}{\f1  "master (of house), lord" }{\i\f1 (LT2:343; probably obsoleted together with }{\b\i\f1 indo}{\i\f1  "house", q.v.)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab indyo}{\f1  "grandchild, descendant" }{\i\f1 (\'d1GY\'d4/\'d1GYON - read *}{\b\i\f1 inyo}{\i\f1  in Noldorin Quenya, that changed }{\b\i\f1 ndy}{\i\f1  to }{\b\i\f1 ny}{\i\f1 ? Cf. }{\b\i\f1 Quenya}{\i\f1  for }{\b\i\f1 Quendya}{\i\f1 .)

\par }{\f1 \tab -}{\b\f1 inen}{\f1  instrumental pl. ending. In }{\b\f1 \'f3mainen}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ:391)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab inga}{\f1  "top, highest point" }{\i\f1 (PM:340)}{\f1 , also adj. "first" }{\i\f1 (ING)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ingaran}{\f1  "high-king" }{\i\f1 (PM:340)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 Ingoldo}{\f1  masc. name; possessive }{\b\f1 Ingoldova}{\f1  "Ingoldo's" }{\i\f1 (VT39:16)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Ingol\'eb}{\f1  "Science/Philosophy" as a whole }{\i\f1 (PM:360; WJ:383 has }{\b\i\f1 ingol\'eb}{\i\f1  ["i\'f1gole"], glossed  "lore". In the }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1 , stem \'d1GOL, the word }{
\b\i\f1 ingol\'eb}{\i\f1  was marked as archaic or poetic and is glossed "deep lore, magic").
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ing\'f3lemo}{\f1  "one with very great knowledge, a 'wizard' ", applied only to great sages of the Eldar in Valinor, like R\'famil }{\i\f1 (PM:360)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ingolmo}{\f1  "loremaster" }{\i\f1 (WJ:383)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ingolond\'eb}{\f1  "Land of the Gnomes" (Beleriand, "but before applied to parts of Valinor") }{\i\f1 (\'d1GOLOD)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ingor}{\f1  "summit of a mountain" }{\i\f1 (PM:340)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ingw\'eb}{\f1  masc. name, "chief". }{\i\f1 (PM:340, ING, WEG). }{\f1 Pl. }{\b\f1 Ingwer}{\f1  "Chieftains", what the Vanyar called themselves (so in PM:340, but in PM:332, the plural is the more regular form }{\b\f1 Ingwi}{\f1 ). }{\b\f1 
Ingw\'eb Ingweron}{\f1  "chief of the chieftains", proper title of Ingw\'eb as high king }{\i\f1 (PM:340)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab inimeit\'eb}{\f1  ?"female"}{\i\f1  (INI)
\par }{\f1 \tab -}{\b\f1 inqua}{\f1  adjectival ending, seen in }{\b\f1 alcarinqua}{\f1  "glorious" }{\i\f1 (WJ:412)}{\f1  from }{\b\f1 alcar}{\f1  "glory". Etymologically, -}{\b\f1 inqua}{\f1  means "-full", like "glory-full" in this case.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab intya}{\f1 - "guess, suppose"}{\i\f1  (INK/INIK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab intyal\'eb}{\f1  "imagination" }{\i\f1 (INK/INIK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab inwisti}{\f1  "mind-mood" (changed by Tolkien from }{\b\f1 inwaldi}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (MR:216, 471)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab inya}{\f1  (1) "female" }{\i\f1 (INI)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 inya }{\f1 (2) "small" }{\i\f1 (LT1:256; this "Qenya" word is evidently obsoleted by # 1 above)}{\f1 
\par [}{\b\f1 Ioloss\'eb}{\f1 ] "Everlasting Snow" = Taniquetil}{\i\f1  (GEY, EY; changed to }{\b\i\f1 Oioloss\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab -}{\b\f1 ion}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (patronymic ending)}{\f1  "son (of), descendant" }{\i\f1 (Y\'d4/YON, LT1:271, LT2:344)}{\f1 
\par \tab [}{\b\f1 \'edra}{\f1  "eternal" }{\i\f1 (GEY; changed to }{\b\i\f1 oira}{\i\f1 , see OY)}{\f1 ] 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'edr\'eb}{\f1  (1) "desire" }{\i\f1 (ID)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \'edr\'eb}{\f1  (2) "when" (relative, not question-word: }{\b\f1 \'edr\'eb Anarinya queluva}{\f1 , "when my sun faileth") }{\i\f1 (FS)}{\f1 
\par [}{\b\f1 \'edr\'eb}{\f1 ] (3) "eternal" }{\i\f1 (read "eternity", as suggested by Christopher Tolkien, but the word was changed to }{\b\i\f1 oir\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (GEY)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 ir\'edci\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  see #}{\b\f1 ric}{\f1 -
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Irild\'eb }{\f1 "Idhril" (Idril) }{\i\f1 (LT2:343)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Irild\'eb Taltelemna}{\f1  = (later) Sindarin }{\i\f1 Idril Celebrindal}{\f1 ;}{\i\f1  }{\f1 replaced }{\b\f1 Irild\'eb Taltelepsa}{
\i\f1  (KYELEP/TELEP)}{\f1 . Tolkien may have replaced }{\b\f1 Irild\'eb}{\f1  as the Quenya form of }{\i\f1 Idril}{\f1  with }{\b\f1 Itaril}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Itarill\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Itarild\'eb}{\f1 , q.v.}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'edrima}{\f1  "lovely, beautiful, desirable" }{\i\f1 (ID, FS)}{\f1 , in FS also pl. }{\b\f1 \'edrimar}{\f1 ; in the "Qenya" of }{\i\f1 F\'edriel's Song}{\f1 , adjectives in -}{\b\f1 a}{\f1  form their plurals in -}{\b\f1 ar}{\f1 
 instead of -}{\b\f1 \'eb}{\f1  as in LotR-style Quenya.}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab irin}{\f1  "town" }{\i\f1 (LT2:343)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'cdriss\'eb}{\f1  fem. name }{\i\f1 (PM:345)}{\f1 , evidently connected to }{\b\f1 \'edr\'eb}{\f1  "desire".
\par }{\b\f1 \tab irmin}{\f1  "the world, all the regions inhabited by Men" }{\i\f1 (LT2:343)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Irmo}{\f1  "Desirer", name of a Vala; normally called }{\b\f1 L\'f3rien}{\f1 , properly the place where he dwells }{\i\f1 (WJ:402)}{\b\f1 
\par \tab is}{\f1  "light snow" }{\i\f1 (LT1:256)}{\f1 
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 is}{\f1  ending for plural "respective" }{\i\f1 (Plotz)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab isca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "pale" }{\i\f1 (LT1:256)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Isil}{\f1  "Moon" }{\i\f1 (FS; SA:sil, Appendix E, SD:302, SIL; also defined as "the Sheen" under THIL)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Isildur}{\f1  (masc.name., *"Moon-servant") }{\i\f1 (SA:sil, Appendix A, ND\'db)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 isilm\'eb}{\f1 
 "moonlight", occurring in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 ; free translation "the moon" in MC:215 (}{\b\f1 isilm\'eb ilcalass\'eb}{\f1 , lit. "moonlight gleaming-in" = "in the moon gleaming"); }{\b\f1 Isilya}{\f1  third day of the Eld
arin six-day week, dedicated to the Moon }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab isqua}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "wise" }{\i\f1 (LT2:339)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab iss\'eb}{\f1  "knowledge, lore" }{\i\f1 (LT2:339; rather }{\b\i\f1 ista}{\i\f1  in Tolkien's later Quenya)}{\f1 
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 iss\'eb}{\f1  a feminine ending, as in }{\b\f1 \'cdriss\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (PM:345)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ista}{\f1  "knowledge" }{\i\f1 (IS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ista}{\f1 - "know", pa.t. }{\b\f1 sint\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (IS, LT2:339)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Ista}{\f1 - is also used for "can" in the sense of "know how to", as in }{\b\f1 istan quet\'eb}{\f1  "I can speak (because I have learned (a) language)" }{
\i\f1 (VT41:6)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Istar}{\f1  "Wizard", used of Gandalf, Saruman, Radagast etc.  Pl. }{\b\f1 Istari}{\f1  is attested. Gen. pl. in the phrase }{\b\f1 Heren Istarion}{\f1  "Order of Wizards" }{\i\f1 (UT:388)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab istima}{\f1  adj. "having knowlegde" }{\i\f1 (IS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Istimor}{\f1  *"Wise Ones" = "Gnomes" (Noldor) }{\i\f1 (IS)}{\f1 . Sg. #}{\b\f1 Istimo}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab istya}{\f1  "knowledge" }{\i\f1 (IS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab istyar}{\f1  "scholar, learned man"}{\i\f1  (IS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab iswa}{\f1  "wise" }{\i\f1 (LT2:339)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'edta}{\f1  "a flash" }{\i\f1 (PM:363)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ita}{\f1 - "sparkle" }{\i\f1 (SA:ril, PM:363)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Itaril}{\f1  (*}{\b\f1 Itarill}{\f1 -), }{\b\f1 Itarill\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Itarild\'eb}{\f1  fem. name, Sindarized as }{\i\f1 Idril}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (PM:346, 348; SA:ril)}{\f1 . (In earlier sources, Tolkien used }{\b\f1 Irild\'eb}{\f1 
 as the Quenya form of }{\i\f1 Idril}{\f1 .)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab itila}{\f1  "twinkling, glinting" }{\i\f1 (PM:363)}{\f1 
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 iva}{\f1  (-}{\b\f1 iv\'eb}{\f1 ) plural possessive ending; seen in }{\b\f1 Eldaiva}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Eldaiv\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ:369)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'cdverind}{\f1 -, }{\b\f1 \'cdverindor}{\f1  "Ireland" }{\i\f1 (LT2:344) The nominative of }{\b\i\f1 \'cdverind}{\i\f1 - must be *}{\b\i\f1 \'cdverin}{\i\f1 , the form }{\b\i\f1 \'cdverind}{\i\f1 - occurring before endings. Compare }{
\b\i\f1 \'cdwerin}{\i\f1  below.}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'cdwerin}{\f1  "Ireland" (also \'cdverindor, \'cdverind-) }{\i\f1 (LT2:344)}{\f1 
\par 
\par <K>
\par }{\b\f1 \tab kelvar}{\f1  (sg. #}{\b\f1 kelva}{\f1 ) "animals, living things that move" }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab kemen}{\f1  "earth"; see }{\b\f1 cemen}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Kement\'e1ri}{\f1  "Earth-queen", title of Yavanna. }{\i\f1 (SA:tar)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b kw\'ed}{, }{\b kw\'edta}{, particle indicating uncertainty (evidently like English "maybe, perhaps"). We would expect the spelling }{\b qu\'ed}{, }{\b qu\'edta}{ }{\i (VT42:34)}{. See }{\b c\'e9}{
 (which form is perhaps to be preferred)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab kyerm\'eb}{\f1  *"prayer", isolated from }{\b\f1 Erukyerm\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (UT:166)}{\f1 
\par 
\par <L>
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 l}{\f1  reduced pronominal affix of the 2. person, "you" (pl.). See }{\b\f1 heca!}{\i\f1  (WJ:364)}{\f1  In the form }{\b\f1 hamil}{\f1  "you judge" }{\i\f1 (VT42:33)}{\f1 , the ending -}{\b\f1 l}{\f1 
 may seem to be a singular "you", perhaps short for -}{\b\f1 ly\'eb}{\f1  (q.v.)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'e1}{\f1  "no, not" }{\i\f1 (LA)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b lacar\'eb }{\i ("k")}{ "not-doing, inaction" (in general) }{\i (VT42:33)}{\i\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab l\'e1 um\'eb}{\f1  > }{\b\f1 laum\'eb}{\f1  "no indeed not, on the contrary" ("also used for asking incredulous questions") }{\i\f1 (LA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab laica}{\f1  (1) "green" }{\i\f1 (in earlier sources }{\b\i\f1 laiqua}{\i\f1 ) (Letters:283)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab laica}{\f1  (2) }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "keen, piercing" }{\i\f1 (LT2:337)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab laic\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "keen, sharp, acute"}{\i\f1  (LAIK - this may very well be a misreading for }{\b\i\f1 laica}{\i\f1 , which would make this word the same as }{\b\i\f1 laica}{\i\f1  # 2 above)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab laim\'eb}{\f1  "shade" }{\i\f1 (DAY)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab laiqua}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "green" }{\i\f1 (L\'c1YAK, LT1:267, MC:214)}{\f1 , "Qenya" pl. }{\b\f1 laiquali}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (MC:216)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 laiqua'ondoisen}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "green-rocks-upon" }{\i\f1 
(MC:221; this is "Qenya"), }{\b\f1 Laiqualass\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "Legolas" (Greanleaf) }{\i\f1 (LT1:267)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab laiquaninwa}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "green-blue"? (cf. }{\b\f1 ninwa}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (Narqelion)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab laiquass\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "greenness" }{\i\f1 (LT1:267)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Laiquendi}{\f1  "Green-elves", not much used (translated from Sindarin }{\i\f1 Laegil}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 Laegelrim}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (WJ:385, SA:quen-/quet-, L\'c1YAK; spelt "Laiqendi" in the latter source)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab laira}{\f1  "shady" }{\i\f1 (DAY)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lair\'eb}{\f1  (1) "summer" }{\i\f1 (Letters:283)}{\f1 , in the calendar of Imladris a precisely defined period of 72 days, but also used without any exact definition }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Oiolair\'eb}{\f1  "Eversummer"; see }{
\b\f1 Coron Oiolair\'eb}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Laireloss\'eb}{\f1  *"Summer-snow", name of a tree }{\i\f1 (UT:167)}{\f1 , perhaps with white flowers.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lair\'eb}{\f1  (2) "poem" }{\i\f1 (GLIR)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 lair\'eb}{\f1  (3) "meadow" }{\i\f1 (LT1:267, GL:39  - perhaps a doubtful word in LotR-style Quenya, since }{\b\i\f1 lair\'eb}{\i\f1  already has to carry two other meanings)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 lairus}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 lairust}{\f1 -) "verdigris" }{\i\f1 (VT41:10)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 laisi}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 laito}{\f1  "youth, vigour, new life" }{\i\f1 (LT1:267; rather }{\b\i\f1 vi\'eb}{\i\f1  or }{\b\i\f1 n\'e9s\'eb}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 ness\'eb}{\i\f1  in Tolkien's later Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab laita}{\f1 - "bless, praise": }{\b\f1 a laita, laita te! Andav\'eb laituvalmet! ... Cormacolindor, a laita t\'e1rienna}{\f1 
 "bless them, bless them! Long shall we bless them! ... [The] Ring-bearers, praise [them] to [the] height!" (}{\b\f1 lait}{\f1 [}{\b\f1 a}{\f1 ]}{\b\f1 -uva-lme-t}{\f1   "bless-shall-we-them) }{\i\f1 (LotR3:VI ch. 4, translated in Letters:308}{\f1 
) Verbal noun }{\b\f1 laital\'eb}{\f1  "praising", isolated from }{\b\f1 Erulaital\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (UT:166, 436)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab laiv\'eb}{\f1  "ointment" }{\i\f1 (LIB}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab laiwa}{\f1  "sick, sickly, ill" }{\i\f1 (SLIW)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lala}{\f1  "no indeed not, on the contrary" ("also used for asking incredulous questions") }{\i\f1 (LA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lala}{\f1 -}{\b\f1  }{\f1 (1) "laugh" }{\i\f1 (PM:359)}{\b\f1 
\par \tab lala}{\f1 - (2) "to deny" }{\i\f1 (LA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lalantila}{\f1  ??? }{\i\f1 (Narqelion)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lalm\'eb}{\f1  "elm-tree" }{\i\f1 (\'c1LAM)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Lalwend\'eb}{\f1  (also short }{\b\f1 Lalwen}{\f1 ) "Laughing Maiden", fem. name }{\i\f1 (PM:343)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'e1ma}{\f1  "ringing sound, echo" }{\i\f1 (LAM)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab laman}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 lamn}{\f1 - or simply }{\b\f1 laman}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 lamni}{\f1  or }{\b\f1 lamani}{\f1 ) "animal" (usually applied to four-footed beasts, and never to reptiles and birds) }{\i\f1 (WJ:416)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'e1maty\'e1v\'eb}{\f1  (pl. }{\b\f1 l\'e1maty\'e1ver}{\f1  attested) "sound-taste" (}{\b\f1 l\'e1ma}{\f1  + }{\b\f1 ty\'e1v\'eb}{\f1 ), individual pleasure in the sounds and forms of words }{\i\f1 (MR:215, 471)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lamba}{\f1  "tongue" (physical tongue, while }{\b\f1 lamb\'eb}{\f1  = "language") }{\i\f1 (WJ:394, LAB)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lamb\'eb}{\f1  "tongue, language" (the usual word for 'language' in non-technical use) }{\i\f1 (WJ:368, 394, \'d1GAL/\'d1GALAM)}{\f1 , "the language or dialect of a particular countr
y or people...never used for 'language' in general, but only for particular forms of speech" }{\i\f1 (VT39:15)}{\f1 ; also name of tengwa 27 }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 . (In early "Qenya", }{\b\f1 lamb\'eb}{\f1 
 was defined as "tongue" of body, but also of land, or even = "speech" [LT2:339]. In LotR-style Quenya }{\b\f1 lamb\'eb}{\f1  ONLY means "tongue = speech", while the word for a physical tongue is }{\b\f1 lamba}{\f1 .) }{\b\f1 Lamb\'eb Valarinwa}{\f1 
 "Valarin tongue" }{\i\f1 (WJ:397)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 lamb\'eb Quendion}{\f1  "the language of the Elves" }{\i\f1 (PM:395)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Lambengolmor}{\f1  "Loremasters of Tongues", a school founded by F\'ebanor }{\i\f1 (WJ:396)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 lambel\'eb}{\f1  "Language" (especially with reference to phonology). *"phonetics" }{\i\f1 (VT39:15)}{\f1 
\par #}{\b\f1 lambetengw\'eb}{\i\f1  }{\f1  "consonant" (as a }{\i\f1 tengw\'eb}{\f1  or phoneme), literally "tongue-signs". Only pl. }{\b\f1 lambetengwi}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("\'f1")}{\f1  is attested }{\i\f1 (VT39:16)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab l\'e1mina}{\f1  "echoing" }{\i\f1 (LAM)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lamma}{\f1  "sound" (noun) }{\i\f1 (LAM)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lamya}{\f1 - "to sound" }{\i\f1 (LAM)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lanat}{\f1  "weft" }{\i\f1 (LAN)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b lanca}{ }{\i ("k")}{ "sharp edge (not of tools); sudden end" }{\i ("as e.g. a cliff-edge, or the clean edge of things made by hand or built, also used in transferred senses, as in }{kuivie-lankasse}{\i , literally
 'on the brink of life', of a perilous situation in which one is likely to fall into death" - VT42:8)}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lanco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "throat, swallow" }{\i\f1 (LAK}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1\fs12  }{\i\f1 , LANK)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b landa}{ (1) noun "boundary" }{\i (VT42:8)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab landa}{\f1  (2) adj. "wide" }{\i\f1 (LAD)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b lane}{ (}{\b lani}{-) noun "hem" }{\i (VT42:8) }{\i\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab lango}{\f1  (1) "broad sword", also "prow of a ship" }{\i\f1 (LAG)
\par }{\f1 \tab [}{\b\f1 lango}{\f1  (2) "throat"] (}{\i\f1 followed by }{\b\i\f1 *langwi}{\i\f1  - this evidently indicates that the pl. of }{\b\i\f1 lango}{\i\f1  is NOT }{\b\i\f1 langwi}{\i\f1 , but rather }{\b\i\f1 langor}{\i\f1 . Contrast }{\b\i\f1 ango}{
\i\f1  "snake", pl. }{\b\i\f1 angwi}{\i\f1 . But whatever the case, }{\b\i\f1 lango}{\i\f1  was changed to }{\b\i\f1 lanco}{\i\f1 .) (LANG, see LANK)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab langon }{\f1 "throat" }{\i\f1 (MC:216; this is "Qenya", possibly an inflected form of }{\b\i\f1 lango}{\i\f1  #2 above - but Tolkien changed it to }{\b\i\f1 lanco}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par \tab *}{\b\f1 langwi}{\f1  - see }{\b\i\f1 lango}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lann\'eb}{\f1  "tissue, cloth" }{\i\f1 (LAN)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lanta}{\f1  noun "a fall"}{\i\f1  (DAT/DANT (TAL\'c1T) )}{\f1 , also }{\b\f1 lant\'eb}{\f1 . Verb }{\b\f1 lanta}{\f1 - "fall" }{\i\f1 (DAT/DANT (TAL\'c1T), Narqelion)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 lantar}{\f1  present tense pl. (}{\i\f1 Nam, RGEO:66}{\f1 
); }{\b\f1 lantaner}{\f1  "fell" (pl.) }{\i\f1 (SD:246)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 lantier}{\f1  "they fell", a plural past tense of }{\b\f1 lanta}{\f1 - "fall" occurring in LR:47; read probably }{\b\f1 lantaner}{\f1  in LotR-style Quenya, as in SD:246. Also sg. }{
\b\f1 lanti\'eb}{\f1  "fell" (LR:56); read likewise *}{\b\f1 lantan\'eb}{\f1 ? (The forms in -}{\b\f1 ier}{\f1 , -}{\b\f1 i\'eb}{\f1  seem to be properly perfects.) Participle }{\b\f1 lantala}{\f1  "falling" (with locative ending: }{\b\f1 lantalass\'eb}{
\f1 ) in }{\i\f1 Markirya.}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b lantalca}{ }{\i ("k")}{ "boundary post or mark" }{\i (VT42:8, 28)}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 lanta-mindon}{\f1  "fallen-towers"; }{\b\f1 lanta-r\'e1nar}{\f1  "in falling-moon" (locative -}{\b\f1 r}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (MC:214; these forms are "Qenya") }{\b\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab }{\f1 #}{\b\f1 lant\'eb}{\f1  (1) noun "fall" in }{\b\f1 Noldolant\'eb}{\f1 , q.v. Also }{\b\f1 lanta}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lant\'eb}{\f1  (2) "falling" }{\i\f1 (MC:214; this is "Qenya" - in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 lantala}{\i\f1 )}{\b\f1 
\par \tab lanu}{\f1  "lead" }{\i\f1 (LT1:268)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b lanwa}{ (1) adj. "within bounds, limited, finite, (well-)defined" }{\i (VT42:8)}{\i\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab lanwa}{\f1  (2) noun "loom" }{\i\f1 (LAN)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b lanya}{- (1) "bound, enclose, separate from, mark the limit of" }{\i (VT42:8)}{\i\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab lanya}{\f1 - (2) "weave" }{\i\f1 (LAN)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 lapatt\'eb}{\f1  "hare" }{\i\f1 (GL:52)
\par }{\b\f1 lappa}{\f1  "hem of robe" }{\i\f1 (GL:52)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab lapsa}{\f1 - "to lick" (frequentative) }{\i\f1 (LAB)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab laps\'eb}{\f1  "babe" }{\i\f1 (LAP)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'e1r}{\f1  (1) "league", a linear measure, 5000 }{\b\f1 rangar}{\f1  (q.v.). A }{\b\f1 ranga }{\f1 was approximately 38 inches, so a }{\b\f1 l\'e1r }{\f1 
was "5277 yards, two feet and four inches [ca. 4826 m], supposing the equivalence to be exact" - close enough to our league of 5280 yards to justify this translation. The basic meaning of }{\b\f1 l\'e1r}{\f1 
 is "pause";  in marches a brief halt was made for each league. }{\i\f1 (UT:285)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'e1r}{\f1  (2) "ears", a pair of ears }{\i\f1 (LAS}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'e1ra}{\f1  "flat" }{\i\f1 (DAL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab larca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "swift, rapid" }{\i\f1 (LAK}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lass\'eb}{\f1  "leaf"; pl. }{\b\f1 lassi}{\f1  is attested (}{\i\f1 Nam}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 RGEO:66}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 Letters:283, LAS}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 , LT1:254, VT39:9, Narqelion)}{\f1 ; gen. }{\b\f1 lass\'ebo}{\f1  "of a leaf", gen. pl. }{
\b\f1 lassion}{\f1  "of leaves" (earlier }{\b\f1 lassio}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (WJ:407)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 lasselanta}{\f1  "leaf-fall", used (as was }{\b\f1 quell\'eb}{\f1 ) for the latter part of autumn and the beginning of winter }{\i\f1 (Appendix D, Letters:428)}
{\f1 ; hence }{\b\f1 Lasselanta}{\f1  alternative name of October }{\i\f1 (PM:135)}{\f1 . Cf. also }{\b\f1 lassemista}{\f1  "leaf-grey" }{\i\f1 (LotR2:III ch. 4, translated in Letters:224)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 lassewinta}{\f1  a variant of }{\b\f1 lasselanta}{
\f1  }{\i\f1 (PM:376)}{\f1 . See also }{\b\f1 lillass\'eba}{\f1 .
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 lassecanta}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "leaf-shaped" }{\i\f1 (KAT)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab lasselanta}{\f1  "leaf-fall = Autumn" }{\i\f1 (DAT/DANT, LAS}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 , Narqelion}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 LT1:254)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lasta}{\f1 - "listen", also adj. }{\b\f1 lasta }{\f1 "listening, hearing"}{\i\f1  (LAS}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Lastalaica}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "sharp-ears" (name) }{\i\f1 (LAS}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'e1ta}{\f1  "open" (adj.) }{\i\f1 (VT39:23)}{\f1 , "open, not closed" }{\i\f1 (VT41:5)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 l\'e1ti\'eb}{\f1  "openness" }{\i\f1 (VT39:23)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 latin}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 latina}{\f1  "open, free, cleared (of land)"}{\i\f1  (LAT)}{\f1 . According to VT41:5, the adjective }{\b\f1 latina}{\f1  "is used rather of freedom of movement, of things not encumbered with obstacles"
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab latta}{\f1  (1) "hole, pit" }{\i\f1 (DAT/DANT)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab latta}{\f1  (2) "strap" }{\i\f1 (LATH)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab latucenda}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "of tin" }{\i\f1 (LT1:268)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab latya}{\f1  "opening" (used as abstract in the source) }{\i\f1 (VT39:23)}{\f1 , but seemingly also used as verb "to open", cf. the negated form }{\b\f1 avalatya}{\f1  *"un-open" = to "close"? }{\i\f1 (VT41:6)}{\f1 . See }{\b\f1 ava}{\f1 - #3.

\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 lau}{\f1  "no indeed not, on the contrary" ("also used for asking incredulous questions")}{\i\f1  (LA)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab lauca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "warm" }{\i\f1 (LAW)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab laum\'eb}{\f1  < }{\b\f1 l\'e1 um\'eb}{\f1  "no indeed not, on the contrary" ("also used for asking incredulous questions")}{\i\f1  (LA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab laur\'eb}{\f1  "gold", but of golden light and colour, not of the metal. In Etym defined as "light of the golden Tree }{\i\f1 Laurelin}{\f1 , gold" - but not properly used of the metal gold }{\i\f1 (L\'c1WAR/GL\'c1WAR, GLAW(-R) )}{\f1 
. In early "Qenya", however, }{\b\f1 laur\'eb}{\f1  was defined as "(the mystic name of) gold" }{\i\f1 (LT1:255, 258)}{\f1  or simply "gold" }{\i\f1 (LT1:248, 268)}{\f1 . In }{\b\f1 Laurelin}{\f1 , q.v., }{\b\f1 Laurenand\'eb}{\f1  "Gold-valley" = L\'f3
rien (the land, not the Vala) }{\i\f1 (UT:253)}{\f1  and }{\b\f1 laurinqu\'eb}{\f1  name of a tree, possibly *"Gold-full one" }{\i\f1 (UT:168)}{\f1 . Derived adjective }{\b\f1 laur\'eba}{\f1  "golden, like gold"; pl. }{\b\f1 lauri\'eb }{\f1 is attested (}
{\i\f1 Nam}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 RGEO:66)}{\f1 . 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Laurelin}{\f1  ("g.sg. }{\i\f1 Laurelinden}{\f1 " or }{\i\f1 Laurelingen}{\f1 ; in LotR-style Quenya this is dat.sg.) Name of the Golden Tree of Valinor, interpreted both *"singing-gold" (stem }{\b\f1 Laurelind}{\f1 
-) and "hanging-gold" (stem }{\b\f1 Laureling}{\f1 -) }{\i\f1 (LIN}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 , L\'c1WAR/GL\'c1WAR, [GLAW(-R)], SA, Letters:308)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 Laurelind\'f3rinan}{\f1  "Valley of Singing Gold", an earlier name of }{\b\f1 Laurenand\'eb}{\f1  (L\'f3rien) }{\i\f1 (UT:253)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 laurelind\'f3renan lindelorendor malinorn\'e9
lion ornemalin}{\f1  *"Goldenlight-music-land-valley music-dream-land of yellow-trees tree-yellow", Quenya elements agglutinated in Entish fashion; 
this supposedly means something like "the valley where the trees in a golden light sing musically, a land of music and dreams; there are yellow trees there, it is a tree-yellow land" }{\i\f1 (LotR2:III ch. 4, translated in Letters:308).}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab laurina}{\f1  "golden" }{\i\f1 (LT1:258)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Laurundo}{\f1  "Glorund" (> Glaurung). Also }{\b\f1 Undolaur\'eb}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (LT2:341)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab laustan\'eb}{\f1  "roaring" }{\i\f1 (MC:213; this is "Qenya") }{\b\f1 
\par \tab laustaner}{\f1  'lausted', past tense ("not 'roared' or 'rushed' but made a windy noise" - but in MC:220, Tolkien himself translated }{\b\f1 laustan\'e9ro}{\f1  as "rushed") }{\i\f1 (MC:216; this is "Qenya")}{\b\f1 
\par \tab lav}{\f1 - (1) "lick", pa.t. #}{\b\f1 l\'e1v\'eb}{\f1  in }{\b\f1 undul\'e1v\'eb}{\f1 , see }{\b\f1 undu}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Nam)}{\f1 ; 1st person aorist }{\b\f1 lavin}{\f1  "I lick" in the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (LAB)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lav}{\f1 - (2) "yield, allow, grant" }{\i\f1 (DAB)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lavaralda}{\f1  (changed from }{\b\f1 lavarin}{\f1 ) some kind of tree (}{\b\f1 alda}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (LR:57)
\par }{\f1 \tab -}{\b\f1 lda}{\f1  "your" (sg.), possessive suffix attested only in the phrase }{\b\f1 Arwen vanimalda}{\f1  "Arwen your beauty", sc. "O beautiful Arwen", and in }{\b\f1 meletyalda}{\f1  "your majesty"}{\i\f1  (WJ:369)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 
Arwen vanimalda}{\f1  was changed to }{\b\f1 Arwen vanimelda}{\f1  in the second edition of LotR, so Tolkien may have decided to re-interpret the phrase as *"Arwen, beautiful Elf (Elda)". The ending for "your" appears as -}{\b\f1 lya}{\f1  elsewhere. }{
\i\f1 (LotR1:II ch. 6)}{\f1 
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 l\'eb}{\f1  ending forming nouns that "seem properly to have been universal and abstract" }{\i\f1 (VT39:16, where Tolkien is actually commenting on the prehistoric form }{\f1 -l\'ea}{\i\f1 , but -}{\b\i\f1 l\'eb}{\i\f1 
 is its Quenya descendant)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lehta}{\f1 - "loose, slacken" }{\i\f1 (LEK)}{\f1 , also adj. }{\b\f1 lehta}{\f1  "free, released" }{\i\f1 (VT39:17)}{\f1 ; #}{\b\f1 lehta tengw\'eb}{\f1  "free element, released element", a term for "vowel" (only pl. }{\b\f1 lehta tengwi}{
\f1  }{\i\f1 [\'f1]}{\f1  is attested; we would rather expect *}{\b\f1 leht\'eb tengwi}{\f1  with the pl. form of the adjective) }{\i\f1 (VT39:17)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lelya}{\f1 - "go, proceed (in any direction), travel", pa.t. }{\b\f1 lend\'eb}{\i\f1  (WJ:363)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lemba}{\f1  "left behind"}{\i\f1  (LEB/LEM)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Lembi}{\f1  "Elves remaining behind" = Telerin Ilkorins }{\i\f1 (LEB/LEM)}{\f1 . Sg. #}{\b\f1 Lemb\'eb}{\f1 .
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b lemenya}{ archaic ordinal "fifth", replaced by }{\b lemp\'eba}{ }{\i (VT42:25)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab lemnar}{\f1  "week" (of five days) }{\i\f1 (LEP/LEPEN/LEPEK)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 lemp\'eb}{\f1  cardinal "five" }{\i\f1 (LEP/LEPEN/LEPEK, GL:53, }{\i VT42:24)}{; }{\b lemp\'eba}{ ordinal "fifth", an analogical formation replacing older }{\b lemenya}{, in tu
rn altered from the historically "correct" form }{\b lepenya}{ because of analogy with the cardinal }{\b lemp\'eb}{ "five" (VT42:25; Vanyarin Quenya maintained }{\b lepenya}{, VT42:26)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab lenca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 (1) "slow" }{\i\f1 (LT2:341)
\par }{\f1 \tab *}{\b\f1 lenca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  (2) - see }{\i\f1 leuka}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lend\'eb}{\f1  "left, went" (pa.t. of }{\b\f1 lelya}{\f1 - "go") }{\i\f1 (FS, LR:47, SD:310, WJ:362)}{\f1 , or, according to the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1 , the pa.t. of }{\b\f1 linna}{\i\f1 - }{\f1 "go" and }{\b\f1 lesta}{\f1 - "leave" }{
\i\f1 (LED, ELED)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab len\'e9m\'eb}{\f1  "with leave" (+ genitive: "with leave of") }{\i\f1 (SD:246)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lenu}{\f1 - "stretch" }{\i\f1 (LT2:341)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lenwa}{\f1  "long and thin, straight, narrow" }{\i\f1 (LT2:341)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Lenw\'eb}{\f1  the leader of the Nandor (Nandorin }{\i\f1 Denweg}{\f1 , primitive *}{\i\f1 Denwego}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (WJ:412)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 lepenya}{\f1 , see }{\b\f1 lemp\'eb
\par \tab l\'ebo}{\f1  "shade, shadow cast by any object" }{\i\f1 (DAY)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 leps\'eb}{\f1  "finger" }{\i\f1 (LEP/LEPET)
\par }{\f1 *}{\b\f1 l\'e9r}{\f1  "man" }{\i\f1 (NI}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1\fs12  }{\i\f1 ) hypothetical Q form of PQ }{\b\i\f1 d\'ear}{\i\f1 ; the form actually used in Quenya was }{\b\i\f1 n\'e9r}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 l\'e9ra}{\f1  adj. "free", of persons }{\i\f1 (VT41:5)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 lerina}{\f1  adj. "free" of things: not guarded, reserved, made fast, or "owned" }{\i\f1 (VT41:5)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 lerya}{\f1 - "release, set free, let go"; negated }{\b\f1 avalerya}{\f1 - "bind, make fast, restrain, deprive of liberty" }{\i\f1 (VT41:5, 6)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 lerta}{\f1 - verb "can" in the sense "be free to do", being under no restraint (physical or other). }{\b\f1 Lertan quet\'eb}{\f1 
 "I can speak (because I am free to do so, there being no obstacle of promise, secrecy, or duty)". Where the absence of a physical restraint is considered, this verb can be used in much the same sense as }{\b\f1 pol}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (VT41:6)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 lesta}{\f1 - (pa.t. }{\b\f1 lend\'eb}{\f1 ) "leave" }{\i\f1 (ELED)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 lestanen}{\f1  "in measure", a word occurring in }{\i\f1 F\'edriel's Song}{\f1 , apparently the instrumental form of a noun #}{\b\f1 lesta}{\f1  "measure", not otherwise attested.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Lestan\'f3r\'eb}{\f1  "Doriath", gen. }{\b\f1 Lestan\'f3r\'ebo}{\i\f1  (WJ:369)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab leuca}{\f1  (1) "snake" }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab leuca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  (2) }{\i\f1 (probably a misreading for *}{\b\i\f1 lenca}{\i\f1 )}{\f1  "loose, slacken" }{\i\f1 (LEK)}{\f1 
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 li}{\f1  partitive pl. ending (simply called a plural suffix in the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1 , stem }{\i\f1 LI}{\f1 ); genitive -}{\b\f1 lion}{\f1  in }{\b\f1 vanim\'e1lion}{\f1 , allative -}{\b\f1 linna}{\f1  and -}{\b\f1 linnar}{\f1  in }{
\b\f1 falmalinnar}{\f1 , q.v. The other cases are only known from the Plotz letter: possessive -}{\b\f1 l\'edva}{\f1 , dative -}{\b\f1 lin}{\f1 , locative -}{\b\f1 liss\'eb}{\f1  or -}{\b\f1 lissen}{\f1 , ablative -}{\b\f1 lillo}{\f1  or -}{\b\f1 lillon}{
\f1 , instrumental -}{\b\f1 l\'ednen}{\f1 , "respective" -}{\b\f1 lis}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab li}{\f1 -, }{\b\f1 lin}{\f1 - a multiplicative prefix }{\i\f1 (LT1:269)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lia}{\f1  "fine thread, spider filament" }{\i\f1 (SLIG). }{\f1 Cf. }{\b\f1 lia}{\f1  "twine" }{\i\f1 (LT1:271)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab liantass\'eb}{\f1  "vine" }{\i\f1 (LT1:271)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab liant\'eb}{\f1  (1) "spider" }{\i\f1 (SLIG)}{\f1 , perhaps obsoleting (2)}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 liant\'eb}{\f1  "tendril" }{\i\f1 (LT1:271)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'edco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "wax" (}{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1  comments, MC:223)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'edcuma}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "taper, candle"}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab li\'eb}{\f1  "people" }{\i\f1 (LI, Narqelion, VT39:6)}{\f1 , in }{\b\f1 Eldali\'eb}{\f1  (q.v.); possessive #}{\b\f1 li\'e9va}{\f1  in }{\b\f1 Mindon Eldali\'e9va}{\f1  (q.v.)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lillass\'eba}{\f1  "having many leaves", pl. }{\b\f1 lillassi\'eb}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 ve tauri lillassi\'eb}{\f1 , lit. *"like many-leaved forests", is translated "like leaves of forests" in MC:215). The }{\b\f1 lil}{\f1 
- element is clearly an assimilated form of }{\b\f1 lin}{\f1 -, # 1, q.v.
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 lillo}{\f1  or -}{\b\f1 lillon}{\f1  ending for partitive pl. ablative }{\i\f1 (Plotz)}{\f1 ; see -}{\b\f1 li
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b lil\'f3t\'eba}{ adjective "having many flowers" }{\i (VT42:18)}{\i\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab lilta}{\f1 - "dance" }{\i\f1 (LILT, Narqelion)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab limba}{\f1  "a drop"}{\i\f1  (LIB}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab limb\'eb}{\f1  "many" }{\i\f1 (LT2:342)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab limp\'eb}{\f1  "(wine), drink of the Valar" }{\i\f1 (LIP)}{\f1 , cf. the early "Qenya" gloss}{\i\f1  }{\f1 "drink of the fairies" }{\i\f1 (LT1:258)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lin}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 lind}{\f1 - "a musical sound" }{\i\f1 (Letters:308)}{\f1 , "melody" }{\i\f1 (LT1:258)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lin}{\f1 - (1) }{\i\f1 (prefix)}{\f1  "many" }{\i\f1 (LI)}{\f1 , seen in }{\b\f1 lindorn\'eba}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 lintyuluss\'eba}{\f1 ; assimilated }{\b\f1 lil}{\f1 - in }{\b\f1 lillass\'eba}{\f1 .
\par \tab [}{\b\f1 lin}{\f1 - (2) "sing" }{\i\f1 (GLIN, struck out)}{\f1 ]
\par \tab }{\b\f1 linda}{\f1  "fair, beautiful" }{\i\f1 (SLIN, LIND)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Lindar}{\f1  "Singers" (sg. }{\b\f1 Linda}{\f1 ), what the Teleri called themselves }{\i\f1 (WJ:380, MR:349, UT:253)}{\f1 . It seems that }{\b\f1 Lindar}{\f1  is also interpreted "the Beautiful" (cf. }{\b\f1 linda}{\f1 
 "fair, beautiful"), but this interpretation seems to belong primarily to Tolkien's earlier conception, when Lindar was the name of the First Clan, the later }{\i\f1 Vanyar}{\f1  (which name similarly means "the Fair"). Adj. }{\b\f1 Lindarin}{\f1  = Te
lerin (but Tolkien of course held it to be = }{\i\f1 Vanyarin}{\f1  when the First Clan, the later Vanyar, were still called }{\i\f1 Lindar}{\f1  \endash  before he decided to apply this name to the third clan, the Teleri) }{\i\f1 (T\'c2/TA3)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lind\'eb}{\f1  "air, tune, singing, song" }{\i\f1 (SA:gond, (LIN}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 , [GLIN])}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 lindelorendor}{\f1  "music-dream-land"; see }{\b\f1 laurelind\'f3renan lindelorendor}{\f1 ... }{\i\f1 
(LotR2:III ch. 4, cf. Letters:308)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lind\'eb}{\f1 - ?"sing" }{\i\f1 (LT1:258; in LotR-style Quenya }{\b\i\f1 lir}{\i\f1 - or #}{\b\i\f1 linda}{\i\f1 -)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lindel\'eb}{\f1  "music" }{\i\f1 (LIN}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 , LT1:258 - #}{\b\i\f1 lindal\'eb}{\i\f1  in }{\b\i\f1 Ainulindal\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 . 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lindel\'eba}{\f1  "melodious" }{\i\f1 (LT1:258)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Lindi}{\f1  What the Green-elves (Laiquendi, Nandor) called themselves; also used in Exilic Quenya }{\i\f1 (WJ:385)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lindo}{\f1  "singer, singing bird" }{\i\f1 (LIN}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Lindon}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Lind\'f3n\'eb}{\f1  "Lindon", place-name }{\i\f1 (WJ:385)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lind\'f3r\'eba}{\f1  ??? }{\i\f1 (Narqelion)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Lind\'f3ri\'eb}{\f1  fem. name, perhaps *"She that arises in beauty" (compare }{\b\f1 Melkor}{\f1  "He that arises in Might") }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 . Cf. }{\b\f1 linda}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lindorn\'eba}{\f1  "having many oak-trees" (adj.) }{\i\f1 (D\'d3RON, LI)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'edn\'eb}{\f1  "cobweb" }{\i\f1 (SLIG)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab }{\f1 -}{\b\f1 l\'ednen}{\f1  ending for partitive pl. instrumental }{\i\f1 (Plotz)}{\f1 ; see -}{\b\f1 li}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 linga}{\f1 - "hang, dangle" }{\i\f1 (LING/GLING)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab linganer }{\f1 "hummed like a harp-string" }{\i\f1 (MC:216; this is "Qenya")}{\b\f1 
\par \tab lingw\'eb}{\f1  "fish" }{\i\f1 (LIW)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lingwil\'f3k\'eb}{\f1  "fish-dragon, sea-serpent" }{\i\f1 (LOK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab linna}{\f1 - "go", pa.t.}{\b\f1  lend\'eb}{\f1  "went" }{\i\f1 (LED; cf. }{\b\i\f1 lelya}{\i\f1 -)
\par }{\f1 \tab -}{\b\f1 linnar}{\f1  see -}{\b\f1 li}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab linqu\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "wet" }{\i\f1 (LINKWI). }{\f1 In early "Qenya", this word was glossed "water" }{\i\f1 (LT1:262)}{\f1 , and "wet" was }{\b\f1 linqui}{\f1  or }{\b\f1 liquin}{\f1 , q.v.}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab linqui }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "wet" }{\i\f1 (MC:216; Tolkien's later Quenya has }{\b\i\f1 linqu\'eb}{\i\f1 .)}{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1 \tab #}{\b\f1 linta}{\f1  "swift", only pl. }{\b\f1 lint\'eb}{\f1  attested }{\i\f1 (Nam, RGEO:66)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lintitinw\'eb}{\f1  "having many stars" }{\i\f1 (LT1:269)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lintulinda}{\f1 ,}{\b\f1  lintulindova}{\f1  *"many-???", *"swift-???" }{\i\f1 (Narqelion)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lintyuluss\'eba}{\f1  "having many poplars"}{\i\f1  (LI)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab linya}{\f1  "pool" }{\i\f1 (LIN}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab linyenwa}{\f1  "old, having many years" }{\i\f1 (YEN)
\par }{\f1 \tab -}{\b\f1 lion}{\f1  ending for partitive pl. genitive }{\i\f1 (Plotz)}{\f1 ; see -}{\b\f1 li}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lipil}{\f1  "little glass" }{\i\f1 (LT1:258)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lipsa}{\f1  "soap" }{\i\f1 (LIB}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lipt\'eb}{\f1 - "to drip" }{\i\f1 (LT1:258; rather *}{\b\i\f1 lipta}{\i\f1 - in Tolkien's later Quenya?)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab liquin}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "wet" }{\i\f1 (LT1:262; Tolkien's later Quenya has }{\b\i\f1 linqu\'eb}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab liquis}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "transparence" }{\i\f1 (LT1:262)}{\f1 
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 lin}{\f1  ending for partitive pl. dative }{\i\f1 (Plotz)}{\f1 ; see -}{\b\f1 li
\par \tab }{\f1 -}{\b\f1 linna}{\f1  or -}{\b\f1 linnar}{\f1  ending for partitive pl. allative }{\i\f1 (Plotz)}{\f1 ; see -}{\b\f1 li}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lir}{\f1 - "to chant" (1st pers. aorist }{\b\f1 lirin}{\f1  "I chant, I sing") }{\i\f1 (LIR}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 , GLIR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lir'}{\f1  ??? }{\i\f1 (Narqelion)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'edr\'eb}{\f1  "song", instrumental }{\b\f1 l\'edrinen}{\f1  "in [the] song" or *"by [the] song" }{\i\f1 (Nam, RGEO:67)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lirilla}{\f1  "lay, song" }{\i\f1 (LT1:258)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lirit}{\f1  "poem" }{\i\f1 (LT1:258)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lirulin}{\f1  "lark" }{\i\f1 (MR:238, 262)}{\f1 , changed from }{\b\f1 aimenel}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 aimenal}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lis}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 liss}{\f1 -, e.g. dat.sg.}{\b\f1  lissen}{\f1 ) "honey"}{\i\f1  (LIS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lisc\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "reed, sedge" }{\i\f1 (LT2:335)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab liss\'eb}{\f1  "sweet" (}{\i\f1 Nam}{\f1 ,}{\i\f1  RGEO:66)}{\f1 
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 liss\'eb}{\f1  or -}{\b\f1 lissen}{\f1  ending for partitive pl. locative }{\i\f1 (Plotz)}{\f1 ; see -}{\b\f1 li}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lits\'eb}{\f1  "sand" }{\i\f1 (LIT)}{\f1 
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 l\'edva}{\f1  ending for partitive pl. possessive }{\i\f1 (Plotz)}{\f1 ; see -}{\b\f1 li}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'edv\'eb}{\f1  "sickness" }{\i\f1 (SLIW)
\par }{\f1 \tab -}{\b\f1 llo}{\f1  ablative ending, "from" or "out of", e.g. }{\b\f1 sindan\'f3riello}{\f1  "out of a grey land", }{\b\f1 R\'f3mello}{\f1  "from the East", }{\b\f1 Mardello}{\f1  *"from Earth" }{\i\f1 (FS)}{\f1 . Pl. -}{\b\f1 llon}{\f1  or -}{
\b\f1 llor}{\f1  (in }{\b\f1 elenillor}{\f1 ); dual -}{\b\f1 lto}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Plotz)}{\f1 
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 lma}{\f1  pronominal ending "our", attested (with the genitive ending -}{\b\f1 o}{\f1  that displaces final -}{\b\f1 a}{\f1 ) in the word }{\b\f1 omentielmo}{\f1  "of our meeting". Tolkien emended }{\b\f1 omentielmo}{\f1  to }{\b\f1 
omentielvo}{\f1  in the Second Edition of LotR, reflecting a revision of the Quenya pronominal system (cf. Letters:447). According to VT43:14, the cluster -}{\b\f1 lm}{\f1 - in the endings for inclusive "we/our" was altered to -}{\b\f1 lv}{\f1 
-. In the revised system, -}{\b\f1 lma}{\f1  should apparently signify }{\i\f1 exclusive}{\f1  "our".}{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1 \tab -}{\b\f1 lm\'eb}{\f1  pro
nominal ending for "we". Likely it was originally intended to be inclusive "we", including the person(s) spoken to; later Tolkien apparently made this the ending for exclusive "we" instead (cf. the changed definition of the corresponding possessive ending
 -}{\b\f1 lma}{\f1 , see above). Exemplified in }{\b\f1 laituvalmet}{\f1  "we shall bless them" (}{\b\f1 lait-uva-lme-t}{\f1  "bless-shall-we-them")  }{\i\f1 (LotR3:VI ch. 4, translated in Letters:308}{\f1 )}{\i\f1 
\par \tab }{\f1 -}{\b\f1 lto}{\f1  ending for dual ablative }{\i\f1 (Plotz)}{\f1 
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 lv}{\f1 - element in pronominal endings for inclusive "we/our" }{\i\f1 (VT43:14)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Omentielvo}{\f1  "of our meeting" (q.v.) apparently includes the ending #-}{\b\f1 lva}{\f1  "our" with the genitive ending -}{\b\f1 o}{\f1 
 attached. The corresponding ending for inclusive "we" may be assumed to be normally *-}{\b\f1 lv\'eb}{\f1 ; the variant form #-}{\b\f1 lw\'eb}{\f1  occurs in the verb }{\b\f1 navilw\'eb}{\f1  "we judge" }{\i\f1 (VT42:34)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'f3}{\f1  "night, a night" }{\i\f1 (DO3/D\'d4)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab loa}{\f1 , literally "growth", used of a solar year (= }{\b\f1 coranar}{\f1 ) when seasonal changes are considered }{\i\f1 (Appendix D; in PM:126 }{\b\i\f1 loa}{\i\f1  is translated "time of growth". Pl. }{\b\i\f1 loar}{\i\f1 , or "l\'f6
ar", in MR:426)}{\f1  The form }{\b loa}{ is also mentioned as the hypothetical Quenya cognate of Sindarin }{\i l\'f4}{ ("swampy"), but precisely because it clashed with }{\b loa}{ "year", this Quenya cognate was not in use }{\i (VT42:10)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab loc}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("lok-")}{\f1  "bend, loop". }{\i\f1 (May be a primitive stem rather than Quenya.) (SA:lok)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 locta}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "sprout, put forth leaves or flowers" }{\i\f1 (LT1:258; would have to become *}{\b\i\f1 lohta}{\i\f1 - in LotR-style Quenya)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab loct\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "blossom (of flowers in bunches or clusters)" }{\i\f1 (LT1:258; would have to become *}{\b\i\f1 loht\'eb}{\i\f1  in LotR-style Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lo\'ebnd\'eb}{\f1  *"year-middle", the middle (183rd) day of the year, inserted between the months of }{\b\f1 N\'e1ri\'eb}{\f1  and }{\b\f1 Cermi\'eb}{\f1  (June and July) in the N\'famen\'f3rean calendar and the Steward's Reckoning }{\i\f1 
(Appendix D)}{\f1 
\par \tab *}{\b\f1 lohta}{\f1 - see }{\b\f1 locta}{\f1 -
\par \tab *}{\b\f1 loht\'eb}{\f1  see }{\b\f1 loct\'eb}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab loico}{\f1  "corpse, dead body"; }{\b\f1 loicol\'edcuma}{\f1  "corpse-candle" in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'f3k\'eb}{\f1  "dragon, snake, serpent, drake", older }{\b\f1 hl\'f3k\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (SA:lok-, LT2:340, LOK; in the }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1  the word is followed by "-\'ee", whatever that is supposed to mean)}{\f1  
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lom}{\f1 - "hide" }{\i\f1 (LT1:255; given in the form }{\b\i\f1 lomir}{\i\f1  "I hide"; read *}{\b\i\f1 lomin}{\i\f1  if the word is to be adapted to LotR-style Quenya.)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lomba}{\f1  "secret" }{\i\f1 (LT1:255)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'f3m\'eb}{\f1  "dusk, twilight", also "night"; according to SD:415, the stem is }{\b\f1 l\'f3mi}{\f1 -. As for the gloss, cf. }{\b\f1 L\'f3mion}{\f1  "Child of Twilight [dusk]", the Quenya name Aredhel secretly gave to Maeglin }{\i\f1 
(SA). }{\f1 Otherwise }{\b\f1 l\'f3m\'eb}{\f1  is usually defined as "night" }{\i\f1 (Letters:308, LR:41, SD:302 cf.414-15, SA:d\'fa)}{\f1 ; the }{\i\f1 Etymologies }{\f1 defines }{\b\f1 l\'f3m\'eb}{\f1 
 as "Night [as phenomenon], night-time, shades of night" }{\i\f1 (DO3/D\'d4, LUM, DOMO)}{\f1 . In early "Qenya" the gloss was "dusk, gloom, darkness" (LT1:255). Cf. }{\b\f1 l\'f3melind\'eb}{\i\f1  }{\f1 pl. }{\b\f1 l\'f3melindi}{\f1  "nightingale" }{
\i\f1 (SA:d\'fa, LR:41; SD:302, MR:172, DO3/D\'d4, LIN}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 , TIN). }{\f1 Derived adjective #}{\b\f1 l\'f3m\'eba}{\f1  "gloomy" in }{\b\f1 L\'f3m\'ebanor}{\f1  "Gloomyland"; see }{\b\f1 Taurelil\'f3m\'eba-tumbalemorna}{\f1 ...}{\i\f1 

\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'f3m\'ebar}{\f1  "child of gloom" (pl. evidently }{\b\f1 L\'f3m\'ebarni}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (LT1:255, 259)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'f3mi}{\f1  "clouds" }{\i\f1 (MC:214; this is "Qenya"; in LotR-style Quenya it would evidently be the pl. of }{\b\i\f1 l\'f3m\'eb}{\i\f1 ) }{\b\f1 
\par \tab l\'f3min}{\f1  "shade, shadow" }{\i\f1 (LT1:255)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 l\'f3na}{\f1  (1) "pool, mere" }{\i\f1 (VT42:10)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'f3na}{\f1  (2) "island, remote land difficult to reach" }{\i\f1 (LONO (AWA) )}{\f1 . Obsoleted by #1 above?
\par \tab [}{\b\f1 l\'f3na}{\f1  (3) is a form Tolkien mentioned as}{ the hypothetical Quenya cognate of Sindarin }{\i loen}{, Telerin }{\i logna}{ adj. "soaking wet" }{\i (VT42:10)}{
, but this cognate was not in use because it clashed with #1 above. At this point, Tolkien may seem to have forgotten #2.]}{\f1 
\par \tab ?}{\b\f1 l\'f3na}{\f1  (4) "dark" }{\i\f1 (adj.)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (DO3/D\'d4)}{\f1 . If this is to be the cognate of "Noldorin"/Sindarin }{\i\f1 d\'fbr}{\f1 , as the context seems to indicate, }{\b\f1 l\'f3na}{\f1  is likely a misreading for *}{\b\f1 l
\'f3ra}{\f1  in Tolkien's manuscript.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lond\'eb}{\f1  "land-locked haven". In }{\b\f1 Alqualond\'eb}{\f1  "Swan-haven" }{\i\f1 (SA)}{\f1 . In the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1 , stem LOD, }{\b\f1 lond\'eb}{\f1  is glossed "road (in sea), entrance to harbour" }{\i\f1 (LOD)}{\f1 .}{
\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lor}{\f1 - "to slumber" }{\i\f1 (LT1:259; the corresponding abstract noun }{\b\i\f1 l\'f3r\'eb}{\i\f1  "slumber" is attested in Tolkien's later Quenya, so this verb must still be valid)}{\f1 . Cf. also }{\b\f1 lor}{\f1  "dream" }{\i\f1 
(Letters:308; probably just an Elvish "element" rather than a complete word)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lorda}{\f1  "drowsy, slumbrous" }{\i\f1 (LT1:259)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'f3r\'eb}{\f1  "slumber" }{\i\f1 (LOS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab L\'f3rellin}{\f1  name of the lake where the Vali\'eb Est\'eb sleeps; apparently meaning *"Dream-lake" or *"Slumber-lake" }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1  
\par }{\b\f1 \tab L\'f3rien}{\f1  (from }{\b\f1 lor}{\f1 -) name of a Vala, properly the place where he dwells, while his real name is }{\b\f1 Irmo}{\i\f1  (WJ:402, LOS (\'d3LOS, SPAN) )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lorna}{\f1  "asleep"}{\i\f1  (LOS)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab loss\'eb}{\f1  (1) noun "snow" or adj. "snow-white" }{\i\f1 (SA:los, MC:213, VT42:18)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 loss\'eb}{\f1  (2) "blossom" ("usually, owing to association with }{\i\f1 olosse}{\f1  snow, only used of white blossom") }{\i\f1 (LOT(H) )}{\f1  
\par }{\b loss\'eba}{ "snow-white" }{\i (VT42:18)}{
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab losseli\'eb }{\f1 "white people" }{\i\f1 (MC:216)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b losta}{- "to bloom" }{\i (VT42:18)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab l\'f3t\'eb}{\f1  "flower", mostly applied to larger single flowers }{\i\f1 (LOT(H), LT1:259, VT42:18)}{\f1 . (The shorter form -}{\b\f1 lot}{\f1  occurs in compounds, e.g. }{\b\f1 f\'famellot}{\f1 
, q.v.) In the names }{\b\f1 Ninquel\'f3te}{\f1  *"White-flower" (= Nimloth), }{\b\f1 Vingil\'f3t\'eb}{\f1  "Foam-flower", the name of E\'e4rendil's ship }{\i\f1 (SA:loth)}{\f1 , also in }{\b\f1 L\'f3tess\'eb}{\f1  fifth month of the year, "May" }{\i\f1 
(Appendix D)}{\f1 . See also }{\b\f1 ol\'f3t\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 lots\'eb}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'f3tefalmar\'ednen}{\f1  "with waves crowned with flowers" }{\i\f1 (MC:220; this is "Qenya")}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b lots\'eb}{ "small single flower" }{\i (VT42:18)}{\b\i\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab lox\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("ks")}{\f1  "hair" }{\i\f1 (LOK)
\par }{\f1 \tab -}{\b\f1 lto}{\f1  "they", pronominal suffix occurring in }{\i\f1 F\'edriel's Song}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 meldielto}{\f1  "they are beloved" and }{\b\f1 c\'e1rielto}{\f1  "they made"), also in LT1:114: }{\b\f1 tulielto}{\f1 
 "they have come". Probably not valid in Tolkien's later Quenya (replaced by -}{\b\f1 nt\'eb}{\f1 ?)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'fa}{\f1  "a time, occasion" }{\i\f1 (LU)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'fac\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "enchantment" }{\i\f1 (LUK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab luhta}{\f1 - "enchant" }{\i\f1 (LUK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab luin}{\f1  "blue", pl. }{\b\f1 luini }{\f1 (}{\i\f1 Nam}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 RGEO:66)}{\f1 . In }{\b\f1 Helluin}{\f1 , name of the star Sirius, and }{\b\f1 Luinil}{\f1 , name of another blue-shining star (or planet). }{\i\f1 
(SA; Luinil is tentatively identified with Neptune, MR:435)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Lumbar}{\f1  name of a star (or planet), tentatively identified with Saturn }{\i\f1 (MR:435)}{\f1 , evidently connected to }{\b\f1 lumbo}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 lumbul\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lumb\'eb}{\f1  "gloom, shadow" }{\i\f1 (LUM)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lumbo}{\f1  "cloud", pl. }{\b\f1 lumbor}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 . In early "Qenya", }{\b\f1 lumbo}{\f1  was glossed "dark lowering cloud" }{\i\f1 (LT1:259)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lumbul\'eb}{\f1  "(heavy) shadow" (}{\i\f1 Nam}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 RGEO:67)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'fam\'eb}{\f1  (1) "time" }{\i\f1 (LU)}{\f1  or "hour", allative }{\b\f1 l\'famenna}{\f1  "upon the hour", elided }{\b\f1 l\'famenn'}{\f1  in the greeting }{\b\f1 elen s\'edla l\'famenn' omentielvo}{\f1 
 because the next word begins with a similar vowel. The complete form }{\b\f1 l\'famenna omentielvo}{\f1  is found in WJ:367 and Letters:424. Cf. also the compounds }{\b\f1 lumeny\'e1r\'eb}{\f1  and }{\b\f1 l\'famequenta}{\f1 , q.v.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'fam\'eb}{\f1  (2) "darkness" (one wonders if Tolkien confused }{\b\f1 l\'fam\'eb}{\f1  "time, hour" and }{\b\f1 l\'f3m\'eb}{\f1  "night") (}{\i\f1 Markirya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lumeny\'e1r\'eb}{\f1  "history, chronological account" }{\i\f1 (NAR}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1  - read *}{\b\i\f1 l\'fameny\'e1r\'eb}{\i\f1 ?)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'famequenta}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "history, chronological account" }{\i\f1 (LU)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'famequental\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "history" }{\i\f1 (LU, KWET)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'famequental\'eba}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "historical" }{\i\f1 (LU)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lumna }{\f1 adj. "lying heavy, burdensome, oppressive, ominous" }{\i\f1 (DUB)}{\f1 . 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lumna}{\f1 - stative verb "be heavy" }{\i\f1 (LR:47, SD:310; cf. }{\b\i\f1 lumna}{\i\f1 - "to lie heavy" in the }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1 , stem}{\f1  }{\i\f1 DUB-)}{\b\f1 
\par \tab l\'fan\'eb}{\f1  "blue" }{\i\f1 (LUG}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 , LT1:262; Nam\'e1ri\'eb has #}{\b\i\f1 luin}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'fanelinqu\'eb }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "blue-wet" (?), translated "surging" }{\i\f1 (MC:213, 220; this is "Qenya") }{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lunga}{\f1  "heavy" }{\i\f1 (LUG}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lunganar}{\f1  "sagged" }{\i\f1 (MC:221; this is "Qenya")}{\b\f1 
\par \tab lungan\'eb}{\f1  "bending" }{\i\f1 (MC:214; this is "Qenya") }{\b\f1 
\par \tab L\'fanoronti}{\f1  "Blue Mountains" }{\i\f1 (LUG}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lunt\'eb}{\f1  "boat" }{\i\f1 (LUT, MC:216)}{\f1 , "ship" }{\i\f1 (LT1:249, LT1:255)}{\f1  
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'far\'eb}{\f1  "dark weather" }{\i\f1 (LT1:259)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'far\'eba}{\f1  "dark, overcast" }{\i\f1 (LT1:259)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lussa}{\f1 - "to whisper" }{\i\f1 (SLUS/SRUS)         
\par }{\b\f1 \tab luss\'eb}{\f1  "a whispering sound" }{\i\f1 (SLUS/SRUS) 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lusta}{\f1  "void, empty" }{\i\f1 (LUS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'fat\'eb}{\f1  "sail" }{\i\f1 (MC:213; this is "Qenya")}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'fatier}{\f1  "sailed" }{\i\f1 (MC:216; this is "Qenya")}{\b\f1 
\par \tab l\'fato}{\f1  "flood" }{\i\f1 (LT1:249)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lutta}{\f1 - "flow, float" }{\i\f1 (LT1:249)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab lutu}{\f1 - "flow, float" }{\i\f1 (LT1:249)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab l\'fava}{\f1  "bow" }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab luvu}{\f1 - "lower, brood" }{\i\f1 (LT1:259)}{\f1 
\par \tab *-}{\b\f1 lva}{\f1  pronominal ending, "our", XXX Only attested in the genitive -}{\b\f1 lvo}{\f1  in the word }{\b\f1 omentielvo}{\f1  (see -}{\b\f1 lma}{\f1 ). For this reason it has been argued that the ending may actually be *-}{\b\f1 lwa}{\f1 
, since there is some evidence that }{\b\f1 wo}{\f1  would change to }{\b\f1 vo}{\f1  in Quenya and the }{\b\f1 w}{\f1  of *-}{\b\f1 lwa}{\f1  could be derived from the dual ending -}{\b\f1 u}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (FG)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ly\'e1}{\f1  ??? (}{\i\f1 Narqelion}{\f1 )
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 lya}{\f1  pronominal suffix "thy, your" in }{\b\f1 tielyanna}{\f1  "upon your path"  }{\i\f1 (UT:22 cf. 51) }{\f1 and }{\b\f1 caritalya(s)}{\f1  "your doing (it)" }{\i\f1 (VT41:17)}{\f1 
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 ly\'eb}{\f1  2. person sg. ending: "thou", }{\b\f1 hiruvaly\'eb}{\f1  "thou shalt find" (}{\i\f1 Nam}{\f1 ,}{\i\f1  RGEO:67)}{\f1 
\par 
\par <M>
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b ma}{ neuter personal pronoun "something, a thing" }{\i (VT42:34)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab m\'e1}{\f1  "hand" }{\i\f1 (MA3, LT2:339, Narqelion, VT39:10)}{\f1 , dual *}{\b\f1 m\'e1t}{\f1  "a pair of hands" attested with a pronominal suffix: }{\b\f1 m\'e1ryat}{\f1 
 "his/her (pair of) hands" (see -}{\b\f1 rya}{\f1 , -}{\b\f1 t}{\f1 ) (}{\i\f1 Nam}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 RGEO:67)}{\f1 , pl. allative }{\b\f1 mannar}{\f1  "into hands" }{\i\f1 (FS)}{\f1 . Cf. -}{\b\f1 mait\'eb}{\f1  "-handed".}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab }{\f1 #}{\b\f1 mac}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "hew with a sword" }{\i\f1 (VT39:11, where the aorist }{\b\i\f1 mac\'eb}{\i\f1  is given)}{\f1 ; cf. early "Qenya" }{\b\f1 mac}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "slay" }{\i\f1 (LT1:259)}{
\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 maca}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "to forge metal" (which rang at the stokes of hammers). }{\i\f1 (VT41:10; in this source this is suggested as the origin of the word }{\b\i\f1 macil}{\i\f1  "sword", but }{\b\i\f1 mac}{\i\f1 
- above would also seem to be relevant, so Tolkien may have changed his mind about the precise etymology of }{\b\i\f1 macil}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 m\'e1ca}{\f1  "each, every" }{\i\f1 (GL:41)}{\f1 ; rather }{\b\f1 ilya}{\f1  in Tolkien's later Quenya
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Macalaur\'eb}{\i\f1  ("Makalaur\'eb")}{\f1 , masc. name, the mother-name (never used in narrative) of }{\b\f1 Canafinw\'eb}{\f1  = Maglor }{\i\f1 (PM:353, MAK)}{\f1 
; his Sindarin name is seen to be based on his mother-name. In the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Macalaur\'eb}{\f1  is interpreted "Gold-cleaver" }{\i\f1 (MAK)}{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 macar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 (1) "swordsman" }{\i\f1 (VT39:11)}{\f1 . In }{\b\f1 Menelmacar}{\f1  (see }{\b\f1 menel}{\f1 ). According to VT41:10, }{\b\f1 macar}{\f1  is literally "forger" (derived from }{\b\f1 maca}{\f1 
-, q.v.), "often used in later use of a warrior".
\par }{\b\f1 \tab macar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  (2) "tradesman" }{\i\f1 (MBAKH)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab macil}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "sword" }{\i\f1 (MAK, LT1:259, VT39:11)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mahalma}{\f1  "throne", nominative pl. }{\b\f1 mahalmar}{\f1  "thrones" and locative pl. }{\b\f1 mahalmassen}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 CO}{\f1 . Adopted and adapted from Valarin }{\i\f1 (WJ:399)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab M\'e1han}{\f1  (pl. }{\b\f1 M\'e1hani}{\f1  attested in WJ:402), one of the eight chiefs of the Valar (Adopted and adapted from Valarin, but usually translated as }{\b\f1 Aratar}{\f1 ) }{\b\f1 M\'e1hanaxar}{\f1 
 the "Doom Ring" of Aman; adopted and adapted from Valarin. }{\i\f1 (WJ:399)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mahta}{\f1 - "wield a weapon" }{\i\f1 (MAK)}{\f1 , "to handle, wield, manage"}{\i\f1  (VT39:10)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mahtar}{\f1  "warrior" }{\i\f1 (MAK)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 Maia}{\f1  pl. }{\b\f1 Maiar}{\f1  "the Beautiful" }{\i\f1 (MR:49)}{\f1 , the lesser (= non-Vala) Ainur that entered E\'e4. Variant }{\b M\'e1ya}{ in VT42:13, pl.}{\f1  }{\b\f1 M\'e1yar}{\f1 
 in PM:363, 364 (is }{\b\f1 M\'e1ya}{\f1  to be understood as the older form of }{\b\f1 Maia}{\f1 ?)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab maica}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "sharp, piercing" }{\i\f1 (SA:maeg)}{\f1 , cf. }{\b\f1 hendumaica}{\f1 ; also noun }{\b\f1 maica}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1 
 "blade of a cutting tool or weapon, especially sword-blade"}{\i\f1  (VT39:11)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mail\'eb}{\f1  "lust"}{\i\f1  (MIL-IK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mail\'eba}{\f1  "lustful" }{\i\f1 (MIL-IK)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 mairo}{\f1  "horse" }{\i\f1 (GL:56; later sources have }{\b\i\f1 rocco}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 maita}{\f1  "hungry" }{\i\f1 (VT39:11)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab mait\'eb}{\f1  "handed" in }{\b\f1 Angamait\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 hyarmait\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 morimait\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Telemmait\'eb}{\f1 , q.v. Etym gives}{\b\f1  mait\'eb}{\f1  pl. }{\b\f1 maisi}{
\f1  "handy, skilled" }{\i\f1 (MA3)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Maitimo}{\f1  "well-shaped one", mother-name (never used in narrative) of }{\b\f1 Nelyafinw\'eb}{\f1  = Maedhros }{\i\f1 (PM:353)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab maivoin\'eb}{\f1  "great longing" }{\i\f1 (LT2:345)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab maiw\'eb}{\f1  "gull" }{\i\f1 (MIW)}{\f1 , pl. }{\b\f1 maiwi}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 Markirya. }{\f1 Cf. also the "Qenya" pl. }{\b\f1 maiwin }{\f1 "gulls" }{\i\f1 (MC:213)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab malarauco}{\f1  "balrog, demon" }{\i\f1 (RUK - rather }{\b\i\f1 valarauco}{\i\f1  in mature Quenya)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab malcan\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "torture" }{\i\f1 (LT1:250)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Malcarauc\'eb }{\f1 "balrog", also }{\b\f1 Valkarauc\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (LT1:250; in mature Quenya }{\b\i\f1 Valarauco}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab malda}{\f1  "gold" (as metal - but LotR gives }{\b\f1 malta}{\f1 , q.v.) }{\i\f1 (SMAL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab malina}{\f1  "yellow" }{\i\f1 (SMAL, Letters:308)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Malinalda}{\f1  *"Yellow-tree", a name of Laurelin }{\i\f1 (SA:mal-}{\f1 ; evidently }{\b\f1 malina}{\f1  + }{\b\f1 alda}{\f1 
). The translation "Tree of Gold" in the Silmarillion Index is free; }{\b\f1 malina}{\f1  means "yellow", not "gold(en)". Cf. }{\b\f1 malinorn\'e9lion }{\f1 "of yellow-trees"; see }{\b\f1 laurelind\'f3renan lindelorendor}{\f1 ... }{\i\f1 
(LotR2:III ch. 4; cf. Letters:308)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Malinorn\'e9lion}{\f1  is partitive pl. genitive of }{\b\f1 malinorn\'eb}{\f1  "mallorn" (UT:167, normal pl. }{\b\f1 malinorni}{\f1 , UT:168).}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab malinai}{\f1  ??? }{\i\f1 (Narqelion)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mall\'eb}{\f1  pl. }{\b\f1 maller }{\f1 "street, road" }{\i\f1 (MBAL, LR:47, 56, LT1:263, SD:310)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab m\'e1lo}{\f1  "friend" }{\i\f1 (MEL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab malo}{\f1  "pollen, yellow powder" }{\i\f1 (SMAL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab m\'e1los}{\f1  "forest" }{\i\f1 (LT2:342 - rather }{\b\i\f1 taur\'eb}{\i\f1  in mature Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab malta}{\f1  "gold", also name of tengwa 18 }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 . Does this obsolete the form }{\b\f1 malda}{\f1  in the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1 , stem }{\i\f1 SMAL}{\f1 ?
\par }{\b\f1 \tab malwa}{\f1  "fallow, pale" }{\i\f1 (SMAL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab m\'e1ma}{\f1  "sheep" }{\i\f1 (WJ:395)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mamil}{\f1  "mother" }{\i\f1 (UT:191)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab man}{\f1  "who" (}{\i\f1 Nam}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 RGEO:67}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 FS, LR:59, Markirya, MC:213, 214)}{\f1 ; cf. PM:357 note 18, where a reference is made to the Eldarin interrogative element }{\i\f1 ma}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 man}{\f1 ). However, }{
\b\f1 man}{\f1  is translated "what" in LR:59: }{\b\f1 man-i\'eb?}{\f1  "what is it?" }{\i\f1 (LR:59; the stative-verb suffix -}{\b\i\f1 i\'eb}{\i\f1  is hardly valid in mature Quenya) }{\f1 Either Tolkien later adjusted the meaning of the word, or }{
\b\f1 man}{\f1  covers both "who" and "what". Cf. also }{\b\f1 mana}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 manen}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab m\'e1na}{\f1  "blessed" }{\i\f1 (FS)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mana}{\f1  a word translated "what is" in the sentence }{\b\f1 mana i-coimas Eldaron[?]}{\f1  "what is the }{\i\f1 coimas}{\f1  (lembas) of the Eldar?" }{\i\f1 (PM:395, a variant reading in PM:403)}{\f1  Either it is *}{\b\f1 ma}{\f1 
 "what" + }{\b\f1 n\'e1}{\f1  "is", or }{\b\f1 mana}{\f1  may itself be a unitary word "what", and there is not really any word meaning "is" in the sentence.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab manar}{\f1  "doom, final end, fate, fortune" (usually = final bliss)}{\i\f1  (MANAD (under MAN) )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab manca}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "trade" }{\i\f1 (MBAKH)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mancal\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "commerce" }{\i\f1 (MBAKH)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mand\'eb}{\f1  "doom, final end, fate, fortune" (usually = final bliss) }{\i\f1 (MANAD, under MAN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mando}{\f1  "custody, safe keeping" }{\i\f1 (MR:350)}{\f1  or "prison, duress" (in }{\i\f1 Mandos}{\f1 , see below) }{\i\f1 (SA:band)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Mando}{\f1  "the Imprisoner or Binder", usually lenghtened }{\b\f1 Mandos}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
(MBAD (\'d1GUR, GOS/GOTH, SPAN) )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Mandos}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 Mandost}{\f1 -) "Castle of Custody" (the approximate meaning, according to MR:350) Used as the name of a Vala, properly the place where he dwells (the }{\i\f1 Halls of Mandos}{\f1 ), while his real name is }{\b\f1 N\'e1
mo}{\i\f1  (WJ:402). }{\f1 In the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Mandos}{\f1  (also }{\b\f1 Mandoss\'eb}{\f1 ) is interpreted somewhat differently, "Dread Imprisoner"  }{\i\f1 (MBAD (MANAD) )}{\f1 . See also }{\b\f1 Mando}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mandu}{\f1  "abyss" }{\i\f1 (MC:214; this is "Qenya" - mature Quenya has }{\b\i\f1 undum\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\b\f1 
\par \tab mandul\'f3mi}{\f1  "hell-shadows" }{\i\f1 (MC:221; this is "Qenya")}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab m\'e1n\'eb}{\f1  "a spirit that has gone to the Valar or to Erum\'e1ni" }{\i\f1 (LT1:260)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab man\'eb}{\f1  "good (moral)" (sc. *"good in a moral sense") }{\i\f1 (LT1:260)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab manen}{\f1  "how" }{\i\f1 (PM:395)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mannar}{\f1  "into (the) hands", allative pl. of }{\b\f1 m\'e1}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (FS)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 mant\'eb}{\f1  pa.t. of }{\b\f1 mat}{\f1 -, }{\b\f1 mata}{\f1 -, q.v.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab manu}{\f1  "departed spirit"}{\i\f1  (MAN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Manw\'eb}{\f1  "Blessed Being" }{\i\f1 (Letters:283)}{\f1 , adopted from Valarin }{\i\f1 M\'e2nawen\'fbz}{\f1 ; names ending in -}{\b\f1 w\'eb}{\f1  were already frequent in Quenya }{\i\f1 (WJ:399). }{\f1 In the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1 
 derived from }{\i\f1 MAN}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 WEG}{\f1 .}{\i\f1  }{\f1 Cf. }{\b\f1 M\'e1nwen}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 M\'e1nw\'eb}{\f1  the oldest Quenya forms of }{\b\f1 Manw\'eb}{\f1 , closer to the Valarin form }{\i\f1 (WJ:399)}{\f1 . Lower-case }{\b\f1 manw\'eb}{
\f1  in LR:56.}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mapa}{\f1 - "grasp, seize" }{\i\f1 (MAP; according to LT2:339 this word was struck out in the "Gnomish Lexicon" [where it was quoted as the cognate of certain Gnomish words], but it reappears in the Etymologies.)
\par }{\f1 \tab #}{\b\f1 maquet}{\f1 - *"ask", only attested in the past tense: }{\b\f1 maquent\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (PM:403)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mar}{\f1  "earth", ablative }{\b\f1 Mardello}{\f1  "from earth" }{\i\f1 (FS). }{\f1 May be more or less identical with }{\b\f1 m\'e1r}{\f1  "home, house" (of persons or peoples; in names like }{\i\f1 Val(i)mar, Vinyamar, Mar-nu-Falmar, Mardil
}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (SA:bar)}{\f1 . Early "Qenya" has }{\b\f1 mar}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 mas}{\f1 -) "dwelling of men, the Earth, -land" }{\i\f1 (LT1:251)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mar}{\f1 - "abide, be settled or fixed" (UT:317); }{\b\f1 maruvan}{\f1  "I will abide" (}{\b\f1 mar}{\f1 -}{\b\f1 uva}{\f1 -}{\b\f1 n}{\f1  "abide-will-I") (}{\i\f1 EO}{\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Mar-nu-Falmar}{\f1  "Home under Waves", name of the sunken N\'famenor }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab m\'e1ra}{\f1  "useful, fit, good" (of things) }{\i\f1 (MAG; see MA3; Arct, VT42:34)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab maranw\'eb}{\f1  "destiny" }{\i\f1 (MBARAT)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 #mard\'eb}{\f1  "hall"; only pl. }{\b\f1 mardi}{\f1  is attested (}{\i\f1 Nam}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 RGEO:66)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Mardil}{\f1  masc. name, "(one) devoted to the house", sc. of the kings }{\i\f1 (Appendix A; interpreted in Letters:386)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mardo}{\f1  "dweller" }{\i\f1 (LT1:251)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab m\'e1ri\'eb}{\f1  "it is good" (}{\i\f1 FS; from }{\b\i\f1 m\'e1ra}{\i\f1  "good"; the stative-verb suffix -}{\b\i\f1 i\'eb}{\i\f1  is hardly valid in mature Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab marilla}{\f1  "pearl" }{\i\f1 (LT1:265)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mart}{\f1  "a piece of luck" }{\i\f1 (LT2:348; in mature Quenya, no word can end in -}{\b\i\f1 rt}{\i\f1 . Read }{\b\i\f1 marto}{\i\f1 , as in LT2:348?)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mart}{\f1 - "it happens" (impersonal) }{\i\f1 (LT2:348 - read }{\b\i\f1 marta}{\i\f1 -?}{\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab marta}{\f1  "fey, fated" }{\i\f1 (MBARAT)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Martalmar}{\f1  (name) }{\i\f1 (TALAM)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Martan}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Martano}{\f1  "Earth-smith", "Earthbuilder", a surname of Aule }{\i\f1 (TAN, GAWA/GOWO - the form }{\b\i\f1 Martan\'f4}{\i\f1  given under MBAR must be understood as primitive)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab marto}{\f1  "fortune, fate, lot" }{\i\f1 (LT2:348)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab martya}{\f1 - "destine" }{\i\f1 (MBARAT)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab marya}{\f1  "pale, fallow, fawn" }{\i\f1 (MAD)
\par }{\f1 \tab -}{\b\f1 mas}{\f1  element in placenames, equivalent to English }{\i\f1 -ton}{\f1 , -}{\i\f1 by}{\f1   }{\i\f1 (LT1:251; may or may not be valid in mature Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mass\'e1ni\'eb}{\f1  "breadgiver", used as a title of the highest woman among any Elvish people, since she had the keeping and gift of the }{\i\f1 coimas}{\f1  (lembas). Also simply translated "Lady" }{\i\f1 (PM:404)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab masta}{\f1  "bread" }{\i\f1 (MBAS, PM:404)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab masta}{\f1 - "bake" }{\i\f1 (MBAS)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab masto}{\f1  "village" }{\i\f1 (LT1:251)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mat}{\f1 - "eat" }{\i\f1 (MAT)}{\f1 , also given as }{\b\f1 mata}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (VT39:5)}{\f1 , pa.t. }{\b\f1 mant\'eb}{\f1  "ate" }{\i\f1 (VT39:7)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab maur}{\f1  "dream, vision" }{\i\f1 (LT1:261)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab maur\'eb}{\f1  "need" }{\i\f1 (MBAS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mausta}{\f1  "compulsion" }{\i\f1 (MBAW)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mauya}{\f1 - "compel" }{\i\f1 (MBAW)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab mavar}{\f1  "shepherd" }{\i\f1 (LT1:268, GL:58)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab mavoit\'eb}{\f1  "having hands" }{\i\f1 (LT2:339)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab maxa}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("ks")}{\f1  "pliant, soft"}{\i\f1  (MASAG)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab max\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("ks") }{\f1 "dough"}{\i\f1  (MASAG)}{\f1 
\par \tab #}{\b\f1 M\'e1ya}{\f1  pl. }{\b\f1 M\'e1yar}{\f1  see }{\b\f1 Maia}{\f1 
\par \tab *}{\b\f1 mbelek\'f4ro}{\f1  is mentioned as "the oldest Q form" of }{\b\f1 Melkor}{\f1 ; this is obviously a form that belongs to Common Eldarin rather than Quenya as we know it; note that it is asterisked as unattested }{\i\f1 (WJ:402)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab me}{\f1  "us"; }{\b\f1 mel-lumna}{\f1  "us-is-heavy", sc. *"is heavy for us" }{\i\f1 (LR:47, }{\b\i\f1 mel}{\i\f1 - is evidently an assimilated form of *}{\b\i\f1 men}{\i\f1  "for us", dative of }{\b\i\f1 me}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 ; dual }{\b\f1 met}{
\f1  "us (two)"
\par }{\b\f1 \tab m\'ebar}{\f1  "gore" }{\i\f1 (LT1:260)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mectar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "Swordsman". In }{\b\f1 Telimectar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (LT1:268; mature Quenya }{\b\i\f1 mehtar}{\i\f1 , also }{\b\i\f1 macar}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mel}{\f1 - "love (as friend)" }{\i\f1 (MEL)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 mel\'e1n\'eb}{\b\i\f1  }{\f1 "I love", a doubtful word in mature Quenya; read perhaps *}{\b\f1 m\'e9lany\'eb}{\f1  or *}{\b\f1 melany\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (LR:70)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 m\'e9la}{\f1  "loving, affectionate" }{\i\f1 (VT39:10)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Melcor}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (so spelt in MR:362)}{\f1  see }{\b\f1 Melkor}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab melda}{\f1  "beloved, dear" }{\i\f1 (MEL)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 meldielto}{\f1  "they are beloved" (sc. }{\b\f1 meld}{\f1 [}{\b\f1 a}{\f1 ]-}{\b\f1 i\'eb}{\f1 -}{\b\f1 lto}{\f1  "beloved-are-they" - both the stative verb ending -}{\b\f1 i\'eb}{\f1 
 "is/are" and the ending -}{\b\f1 lto}{\f1  "they" may be obsolete in mature Quenya) }{\i\f1 (FS)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab meles}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 meless\'eb}{\f1  "love" }{\i\f1 (LT1:262; rather }{\b\i\f1 melm\'eb}{\i\f1  in mature Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab meletyalda}{\f1  "your mighty" = "your majesty" (see -}{\b\f1 lda}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 meletya}{\f1  = *"mighty"). In full }{\b\f1 Aran Meletyalda}{\f1  "king your mighty" }{\i\f1 (WJ:369)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab melima}{\f1  "loveable, fair"}{\i\f1  (MEL)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Melimar}{\f1  a name of the Lindar (in Tolkien's former conception = the later }{\i\f1 Vanyar}{\f1 , not the Teleri)}{\i\f1  (MEL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab melin}{\f1  "dear"}{\i\f1  (MEL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab melindo}{\f1  "lover" (m.) }{\i\f1 (MEL)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab meliss\'eb}{\f1  "lover" (f.)}{\i\f1  (MEL)}{\b\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Melko}{\f1  "Mighty One", name of the rebellious Vala, usually called }{\b\f1 Melkor}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (MIL-IK, MOR; FS - MR:350 confirms that the form }{\b\i\f1 Melko}{\i\f1  is still valid in matur
e Quenya, though not interpreted "Greedy One" as in the }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Melkor}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (spelt }{\b\i\f1 Melcor}{\i\f1  in MR:362)}{\f1 , the rebellious Vala, the devil of the Silmarillion mythos. Older form }{\b\f1 Melk\'f3r\'eb}{\f1 
 "Mighty-rising" (hence the interpretation "He that arises in power"). Oldest form *}{\b\f1 mbelek\'f4ro}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ:402)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Melkoroh\'edni}{\f1 
 "Children of Melkor", Orcs ("but the wiser say: nay, the slaves of Melkor; but not his children, for Melkor had no children") }{\i\f1 (MR:416)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab melm\'eb}{\f1  "love" (noun) }{\i\f1 (MEL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab melwa}{\f1  "lovely" }{\i\f1 (LT1:262)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab men}{\f1  (1) "way" }{\i\f1 (SA)}{\f1  or "place, spot" }{\i\f1 (MEN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab men}{\f1  (2) "who", evidently a misreading or miswriting for }{\b\f1 man}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (MC:221, in Markirya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab m\'e9na}{\f1  "region" }{\i\f1 (MEN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab m\'e9n\'eb}{\f1  "on us" }{\i\f1 (SD:310)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 Menel}{\f1  "heavens" (}{\i\f1 Markirya, SA)}{\f1 , "the heavens, the firmament" }{\i\f1 (SD:401)}{\f1 , "the apparent dome in the sky"}{\i\f1  (MR:387)}{\f1 . Found in names like }{\b\f1 Meneldil}{
\f1  *"Heaven-friend" = astronomer }{\i\f1 (Appendix A; Letters:386)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Meneldur}{\f1  masc. name, *"Heaven-servant" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Menelmacar}{\f1  "Swordsman of the Sky", the Orion constellation (also called }{\i\f1 
Telumehtar}{\f1 , Appendix E, first footnote); the older name was }{\b\f1 Menelmacil}{\f1  *"Heaven-sword" }{\i\f1 (WJ:411)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Meneltarma}{\f1  "Pillar of Heaven", name of the great central mountain of N\'famenor }{\i\f1 (SA:tar, }{\i VT42:21)
}{\i\f1 . }{\b\f1 Menelya}{\f1  fifth day of the Eldarin six-day week, dedicated to the heavens }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 menta}{\f1 - "send, cause to go" (in a desired direction) }{\i\f1 (VT41:6)}{\f1 , also noun }{\b\f1 menta}{\f1  = "sending" or "message" as in }{\b\f1 sanwe-menta}{\f1 
 "thought-sending, mental message" }{\i\f1 (VT41:5)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ment\'eb}{\f1  "point, end"}{\i\f1  (MET)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab m\'eboi}{\f1  "cat", a somewhat strange word by mature Quenya standards (no other cases of final -}{\b\f1 oi}{\f1  in the singular). }{\b\f1 Vardo M\'eboita }{\f1 "Prince of Cats"; }{\b\f1 m\'eboita}{\f1 
 seems to be a kind of adjective rather than a genitive }{\i\f1 (LT2:348)}{\f1 . 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mer}{\f1 - "wish, desire, want" (the form }{\b\f1 mer\'eb}{\f1  given in Etym seems to be the 3rd person sg. aorist, *"wishes, desires, wants"); pa.t. }{\b\f1 mern\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (MER)
\par }{\f1 \tab [}{\b\f1 merca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "wild" }{\i\f1 (MER\'c9K)}{\f1 ]
\par }{\b\f1 \tab meren}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 merend}{\f1 -), }{\b\f1 merend\'eb}{\f1  "feast, festival" }{\i\f1 (MBER)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab merya}{\f1  "festive" }{\i\f1 (MBER)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab meryal\'eb}{\f1  "holiday" }{\i\f1 (MBER)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mesta}{\f1  ?"journey" }{\i\f1 (Arct)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab met}{\f1  "us (two)", including the dual ending -}{\b\f1 t}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Me}{\f1  (LR:56) evidently means "we".
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Metelair\'eb}{\f1  alternative name of August }{\i\f1 (PM:135)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Meterr\'edv\'eb}{\f1  alternative name of January }{\i\f1 (PM:135)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab m\'e9tima}{\f1  "last" }{\i\f1 (Markirya)}{\f1 , in Markirya also twice }{\b\f1 m\'e9tim'}{\f1 , since the following words (}{\b\f1 auress\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 and\'fan\'eb}{\f1 ) begin in an }{\b\f1 a}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab metta}{\f1  "end"; }{\b\f1 Ambar-metta}{\f1  "world-end, the end of the world" }{\i\f1 (EO)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 mettar\'eb}{\f1  *"end-day" = New Years' Eve in the N\'famen\'f3rean calendar and the Steward's Reckoning, not belonging to any month }
{\i\f1 (Appendix D)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab metya}{\f1 - "put an end to" }{\i\f1 (MET)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mi}{\f1  "in, within" }{\i\f1 (MI)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 m\'ed}{\f1  "in the" (}{\i\f1 Nam}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 RGEO:66}{\f1 ; }{\i\f1 CO}{\f1  gives }{\b\f1 mi}{\f1 ; the correct forms should evidenly be }{\b\f1 mi}{\f1  = "in" and }{\b\f1 m\'ed}{\f1  = 
}{\b\f1 mi i}{\f1  "in the"). Allative }{\b\f1 minna}{\f1  "to the inside, into"}{\i\f1  (MI).
\par }{\b\f1 \tab milca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "greedy" }{\i\f1 (MIL-IK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab milm\'eb}{\f1  "desire, greed" }{\i\f1 (MIL-IK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab milya}{\f1 - "long for" }{\i\f1 (MIL-IK)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 m\'edna}{\f1  "desiring to start, eager to go", also verb }{\b\f1 m\'edna}{\f1 - "desire to go in some direction, to wish to go to a place, make for it, have some end in view" }{\i\f1 (VT39:11)}{\f1 

\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Minalcar}{\f1  masc. name, *"First-glory"??? }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Minardil}{\f1  masc.name *"}{\i\f1 minar}{\f1 [?]-friend". Perhaps }{\b\f1 minar}{\f1  is to be understood as a variant of }{\b\f1 minas}{\f1  (}{\i\f1 s}{\f1  being voiced to }{\i\f1 z}{\f1 
 by contact with the voiced plosive that follows, and then regularly becoming }{\i\f1 r}{\f1 ); if so, the name means *"Tower-friend" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b minass\'eb}{, noun "fort, city, with a citadel and central watch-tower" }{\i (VT42:24)}{
\par }{\b minasurie}{ "enquiry" (}{\b\f1 \'de}{, the word is actually cited as }{\b mina\'feurie}{) in }{\b Ondon\'f3re N\'f3messeron Mina\'feurie}{ "Enquiry into the Place-names of Gondor". The editor tentatively analyzes }{\b mina\'feurie}{ as #}{\b mina}{
 "into" + #}{\b \'feurie}{ (#}{\b suri\'eb}{) "seeking" }{\i (VT42:17, 30-31)}{.}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Minastan}{\f1  masc.name, *"Tower-maker" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Minastir}{\f1  masc. name, *"Tower-watcher" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab minda}{\f1  "prominent, conspicuous" }{\i\f1 (MINI)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b mind\'eb}{ "turret" }{\i (VT42:24)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab mindo}{\f1  "isolated tower" }{\i\f1 (MINI)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Mindolluin}{\f1  *"Blue Tower" (}{\b\f1 mindon}{\f1  + }{\b\f1 luin}{\f1 ), name of a mountain. (Christopher Tolkien translates the name as "Tower
ing Blue-head" in the Silmarillion Index, but this seems to be based on the questionable assumption that it includes the Sindarin element }{\i\f1 dol}{\f1 
 "head, hill". Unless this translation is given in his father's papers, the name is better explained as a Quenya compound.)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mindon}{\f1  "(great, lofty) tower", said to be an augmented form of }{\b\f1 mind\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (VT42:24)}{\f1 . Allative pl. }{\b\f1 mindoninnar }{\f1 in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 , changed to the contracted form }{\b\f1 mindonnar}{\f1 
. Cf. also }{\b\f1 Mindon Eldali\'e9va}{\f1  "Lofty Tower of the Eldali\'eb" }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab min\'eb}{\f1  "one"}{\i\f1  (MINI)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab minga-r\'e1nar}{\f1  "in waning-moon" (locative -}{\b\f1 r}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (MC:213; this is "Qenya") }{\b\f1 
\par \tab minna}{\f1  "to the inside, into" (also }{\b\f1 mir}{\f1 )}{\i\f1  (MI)}{\f1 . Possibly #}{\b\f1 mina}{\f1  in }{\b\f1 minasurie}{\f1 , q.v.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Minn\'f3nar}{\f1  "First-born", Elves (as contrasted to }{\b\f1 Apan\'f3nar}{\f1 , the After-born, Men). Sg. #}{\b\f1 Minn\'f3na}{\f1   }{\i\f1 (WJ:403)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab minqu\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "eleven" }{\i\f1 (MINIK-W, LT1:260)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mintya}{\f1  ??? }{\i\f1 (Narqelion)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab minya}{\f1  "first" }{\i\f1 (MINI)}{\f1  (cf. }{\b\f1 Minyatur}{\f1 ); "eminent, prominent"}{ }{\i (VT42:24, 25)}{.}{\f1  }{\b\f1 Minyar}{\f1 
 "Firsts", the original name of the Vanyar (or rather the direct Quenya descendant of the original Primitive Quendian name) }{\i\f1 (WJ:380)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 Minyarussa}{\f1  "First-}{\i\f1 russa}{\f1 " }{\i\f1 (VT41:10)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Minyatur}{\f1  "First-ruler"; }{\b\f1 Tar-Minyatur}{\f1  "High First-ruler", title of Elros as the first King of N\'famenor }{\i\f1 (SA:minas, PM:348, SA:tur)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab miquilis}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "kisses" (noun) }{\i\f1 (MC:215; this is "Qenya")}{\b\f1 
\par \tab mir}{\f1  (1) "to the inside, into"}{\i\f1  }{\f1 (also }{\b\f1 minna}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (MI)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mir}{\f1  (2) "one" }{\i\f1 (LT1:260; in LotR-style Quenya rather }{\b\i\f1 min\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab m\'edr\'eb}{\f1  "jewel" }{\i\f1 (MIR, SA:m\'eer). }{\f1 Cf. }{\b\f1 Elemm\'edr\'eb}{\f1 ; short form -}{\b\f1 mir }{\f1 in }{\b\f1 Tar-Atanamir}{\f1 .}{\i\f1  (SA:m\'eer)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab M\'edriel}{\f1  *"Jewel-woman" }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 , genitive }{\b\f1 M\'edriello}{\f1  (see }{\b\f1 namna}{\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab miril}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 mirill}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 mirilli}{\f1 ) "shining jewel"}{\i\f1  (MBIRIL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mirilya}{\f1 - "glitter" }{\i\f1 (MBIRIL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mirima}{\f1  "free" }{\i\f1 (MIS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Mirimor}{\f1  *"the Free", a name of the Teleri; sg. #}{\b\f1 Mirimo}{\i\f1  (MIS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mirroanwi}{\f1  "incarnates, those (spirits) 'put into flesh' "; sg. *}{\b\f1 mirroanw\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (MR:350)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 miruvor}{\f1 , full form }{\b\f1 miruv\'f3r\'eb}{\f1  "meed", "a special wine or cordial"; possessive }{\b\f1 miruv\'f3reva}{\f1  "of meed" (}{\i\f1 Nam}{\f1 ,}{\i\f1  RGEO:66}{\f1 ; }{\i\f1 WJ:399)}{
\f1 .}{\i\f1  }{\f1 In the "Qenya Lexicon", }{\b\f1 miruv\'f3r\'eb}{\f1  was defined "nectar, drink of the Valar" }{\i\f1 (LT1:261)}{\f1 .
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab mista}{\f1  "grey"; see }{\b\f1 lassemista
\par \tab mista}{\f1 - "stray about"}{\i\f1  (MIS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mist\'eb}{\f1  "fine rain"}{\i\f1  (MIZD)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Mittalmar}{\f1  the "Midlands" of N\'famenor }{\i\f1 (UT:165)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mitya}{\f1  "interior" (adj) }{\i\f1 (MI)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab miul\'eb}{\f1  "whining, mewing" }{\i\f1 (MIW)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mixa}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("ks")}{\f1  "wet" }{\i\f1 (MISK)
\par }{\f1 \tab -}{\b\f1 mm\'eb}{\f1  pronominal ending, at one conceptual stage exclusive "we", seen in }{\b\f1 vamm\'eb}{\f1  "we won't" }{\i\f1 (WJ:371)}{\f1 . Later, Tolkien redefined -}{\b\f1 mm\'eb}{\f1  as the ending for dual "we" }{\i\f1 (VT43:6)}{\f1 
; it is unclear whether this form is inclusive or exclusive, or whether this distinction is upheld in the dual pronouns. If it is, -}{\b\f1 mm\'eb}{\f1  is most likely exclusive (connecting with the dual pronoun }{\b\f1 met}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}
{\f1 ). 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b mo}{, indefinite pronoun "one, someone" }{\i (VT42:34)}{\i\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab -}{\b\f1 mo}{\f1  ending frequent in names and titles, sometimes with an agental significance }{\i\f1 (WJ:400)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab moc}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "hate" }{\i\f1 (given as }{\b\i\f1 mocir}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ["k"] "I hate" in LT1:258; read *}{\b\i\f1 mocin}{\i\f1  if the word is to be adapted to Tolkien's later Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 moica}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "gentle, soft" }{\i\f1 (GL:58)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab moil\'eb}{\f1  "tarn" }{\i\f1 (LT2:349)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab moina}{\f1  (1) "familiar, dear"}{\i\f1  (MOY (MUY) )
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 moina}{\f1  (2) "safe, secure" }{\i\f1 (GL:58; this "Qenya" word is evidently obsoleted by # 1 above. This second }{\b\i\f1 moina}{\i\f1  seems to reappear as }{\b\i\f1 muina}{\i\f1 
 "hidden, secret" in Tolkien's later Quenya.)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab m\'f3l}{\f1  "slave, thrall" }{\i\f1 (M\'d4)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab m\'f3lanoldorin}{\f1  "the language of the Noldor enslaved by Morgoth" }{\i\f1 (M\'d4)}{\b\f1  }{\i\f1 (Changed from }{\b\i\f1 m\'falanoldorin}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mor}{\f1  "darkness" }{\i\f1 (Letters:308; probably just an Elvish "element" rather than a complete word; Nam\'e1ri\'eb has }{\b\i\f1 morni\'eb}{\i\f1  for "darkness")}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab morco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "bear" }{\i\f1 (MOR\'d3K)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mordo}{\f1  (1) "shadow, obscurity, stain" }{\i\f1 (MOR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mordo}{\f1  (2) "warrior, hero" }{\i\f1 (LT1:268 - probably obsoleted by # 1 above)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mor\'eb}{\f1  "black" }{\i\f1 (MOR)}{\f1 , "dark, darkness" }{\i\f1 (Letters:282)}{\f1 . In compounds }{\b\f1 mori}{\f1 - (q.v.) 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab m\'f3r\'eb}{\f1  "blackness, dark, night, darkness" }{\i\f1 (MOR, MC:214)}{\f1 , also given with short vowel:}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 mor\'eb}{\f1  "dark, darkness" }{\i\f1 (Letters:282)}{\f1 .
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 mori}{\f1 - "dark, black" in a number of compounds (independent form }{\b\f1 mor\'eb}{\f1 , q.v.):}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 Morimando}{\f1  "Dark Mando" = Mandos }{\i\f1 (MBAD)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 morimait\'eb}{
\f1  "black-handed" }{\i\f1 (LotR3:VI ch. 6). }{\b\f1 Moriquendi}{\f1  "Dark Elves"}{\i\f1  (SA:mor, WJ:361, 373)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Moringotto}{\f1  "Black Foe", Sindarin }{\i\f1 Morgoth}{\f1 . The oldest form is said to have been }{\b\f1 Mori\'f1gotho}{\f1 
 }{\i\f1 (MR:194).}{\f1  }{\b\f1 Morion}{\f1  "the dark one", a title of Morgoth }{\i\f1 (FS)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Morifinw\'eb}{\f1  "dark Finw\'eb", masc. name; he was called }{\i\f1 Caranthir}{\f1  in Sindarin (short Quenya name }{\b\f1 Moryo}{\f1 ). }{
\i\f1 (PM:353)}{\b\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab m\'f3ri}{\f1  "dark" }{\i\f1 (MC:221; this is "Qenya"; in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 m\'f3r\'eb}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 mor\'eb}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mori}{\f1  "night" }{\i\f1 (LT1:261, in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 m\'f3r\'eb}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 mor\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab morilind\'eb}{\f1  "nightingale" }{\i\f1 (MOR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab morion}{\f1  "son of the dark" (in F\'edriel's Song, }{\i\f1 Morion}{\f1  is translated "dark one", referring to Melko[r]) }{\i\f1 (LT1:261)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Mormacil}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "Black-sword" (name of T\'farin, Sindarin }{\i\f1 Mormegil}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (MAK)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 morna}{\f1  "dark, black" }{\i\f1 (Letters:282, LT1:261)}{\f1  or "gloomy, sombre" }{\i\f1 (MOR)}{\f1 . In }{\b\f1 tumbalemorna}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Letters:282)}{\f1 , q.v. Pl. }{\b\f1 morn\'eb}{\f1  in }{
\i\f1 Markirya}{\b\i\f1  }{\f1 (the first version of this poem had "green rocks", MC:215, changed to }{\b\f1 ondolisse morn\'eb}{\f1  "upon dark rocks" in the final version; see MC:220, note 8).}{\i\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab morni\'eb}{\f1  "darkness" (}{\i\f1 Nam}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 RGEO:67)}{\f1 . Early "Qenya" also has }{\b\f1 Morni\'eb}{\f1  "Black Grief", "the black ship that plies between Mandos and Erum\'e1ni" }{\i\f1 
(LT1:261)}{\f1 . This is probably a compound }{\b\f1 mor}{\f1 - "black" and }{\b\f1 ni\'eb}{\f1  "tear".
\par }{\b\f1 \tab morqua}{\f1  "black" }{\i\f1 (LT1:261; also }{\b\i\f1 morna}{\i\f1  in LotR-style Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab moru}{\f1 - "to hide" }{\i\f1 (LT1:261)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Moryo}{\f1  see }{\b\f1 Morifinw\'eb
\par \tab m\'f3ta}{\f1 - "labour, toil" }{\i\f1 (M\'d4)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab motto}{\f1  "blot" }{\i\f1 (MBOTH)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab muil\'eb}{\f1  "secrecy"}{\i\f1  (MUY)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab muina}{\f1  "hidden, secret"}{\i\f1  (MUY)
\par }{\f1 \tab [}{\b\f1 m\'falanoldorin}{\f1 ] "the language of the Noldor enslaved by Morgoth" }{\i\f1 (M\'d4)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Changed to }{\b\i\f1 m\'f3lanoldorin}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mundo }{\f1 (1) "bull" }{\i\f1 (Letters:422)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab mundo}{\f1  (2) "snout, nose, cape" }{\i\f1 (MBUD)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab murm\'eb}{\f1  "slumber" }{\i\f1 (LT1:261)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab murm\'eba}{\f1  "slumbrous" }{\i\f1 (LT1:261)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab muru}{\f1 - "to slumber" }{\i\f1 (LT1:261)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 muss\'eb}{\f1  "soft" }{\i\f1 (VT:39:17)}{\f1 , also used as a noun (perhaps primarily in the pl. form }{\b\f1 mussi}{\f1 ) with the same meaning as }{\b\f1 muss\'eb tengwi}{\f1 , see below. }{\i\f1 (VT39:17)}{\b\i\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 #}{\b\f1 muss\'eb tengw\'eb}{\f1  phrase only attested in the pl.:}{\b\f1  muss\'eb tengwi}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("\'f1")}{\f1  "soft elements", a term for vowels, semi-vowels (}{\i\f1 y}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 w}{\f1 
)  and continuants (}{\i\f1 l}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 r}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 m}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 n}{\f1 ). }{\i\f1 (In the pl. we would rather expect *}{\b\i\f1 mussi tengwi}{\i\f1  with the pl. form of the adjective.) (VT39:17)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 
\par <N>
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 -}{\b\f1 n}{\f1  (1) dative ending, in }{\b\f1 nin}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 enyalien}{\f1 . Pl. -}{\b\f1 in}{\f1 , partitive pl. -}{\b\f1 lin}{\f1 , dual -}{\b\f1 nt}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Plotz)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab -}{\b\f1 n}{\f1  (2), also -}{\b\f1 ny\'eb}{\f1 , pronominal ending, 1st person sg. "I", as in }{\b\f1 ut\'falien}{\f1  "I am come" (}{\i\f1 EO}{\f1 )
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 n}{\f1  (3) a plural sign used in some of the case endings }{\i\f1 (WJ:407)}{\f1 : Pl. genitive -}{\b\f1 on}{\f1 , pl. ablative -}{\b\f1 llon}{\f1  (but also -}{\b\f1 llor}{\f1 ), pl. locative -}{\b\f1 ssen}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n-alalmino}{\f1  ??? (twice in }{\i\f1 Narqelion}{\f1 ; perhaps }{\b\f1 ne}{\f1  + }{\b\f1 alalmino}{\f1 )
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 n\'e1}{\f1  (1) "is" (}{\i\f1 Nam}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 RGEO:67)}{\f1 , future tense }{\b nauva}{ "will be" }{\i (VT42:34)}{\f1  .See also }{\b\f1 nai}{\f1 .
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab n\'e1}{\f1  (2), also }{\b\f1 n\'e1n}{\f1 , "but, on the contrary, on the other hand" }{\i\f1 (NDAN; the form }{\b\i\f1 nan}{\i\f1 , q.v., is probably to be preferred to avoid confusion with }{\b\i\f1 
n\'e1}{\i\f1  "is", *}{\b\i\f1 n\'e1n}{\i\f1  "I am")
\par }{\b\f1 \tab na}{\f1  "to, towards" }{\i\f1 (N\'c2}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab na}{\f1 - a prefix occurring in the }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1  poem, changed to }{\b\f1 a}{\f1 -, q.v.}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nac}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "bite"}{\i\f1  (NAK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nahamna}{\f1  untranslated word occurring in LR:47 (= }{\b\f1 nucumna}{\f1  "humbled" in SD:246, cf. SD:290, end of note 59)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Nahar}{\f1  the name of Orom\'eb's horse, adopted and adapted from Valarin }{\i\f1 (WJ:401)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nahta}{\f1  "a bite"}{\i\f1  (NAK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nai}{\f1  (1) "be it that", used with a future tense-verb to express a }{\i\f1 wish}{\f1 . The translation "maybe" in Tolkien's rendering of }{\i\f1 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\f1 
 is somewhat misleading; he used "be it that" in the interlinear translation in RGEO:67. }{\b\f1 Nai hiruvaly\'eb Valimar! Nai ely\'eb hiruva!}{\f1  *"May thou find Valimar. May even thou find it!" }{\i\f1 (Nam)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Nai tiruvantes}{\f1 
 "be it that they will guard it" > "may they guard it" }{\i\f1 (CO)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nai}{\f1  (2) "alas" }{\i\f1 (NAY; may be obsoleted by # 1 above - in LotR-style Quenya, }{\b\i\f1 ai}{\i\f1  is to be preferred)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 naica}{\f1  "dagger" }{\i\f1 (GL:37)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab naic\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "sharp pain"}{\i\f1  (N\'c1YAK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab naicel\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "sharp pain" }{\i\f1 (N\'c1YAK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab naicel\'eba}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "painful" }{\i\f1 (N\'c1YAK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab naico}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\b\f1  }{\f1 "of hill(s)" (???) }{\i\f1 (MC:221; this is "Qenya")}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab naina}{\f1 - "lament" (verb) }{\i\f1 (NAY)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 naini\'eb}{\f1  "lament" (noun) }{\i\f1 (RGEO:66)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Naira}{\f1  "Heart of Flame", a name of the Sun }{\i\f1 (MR:198)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nair\'eb}{\f1  "lament" }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (NAY)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nal}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 nall\'eb}{\f1  "dale, dell" }{\i\f1 (LT1:261)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nalda}{\f1  "valley" used as an adjective }{\i\f1 (LT1:261)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nalla}{\f1  ??? }{\i\f1 (Narqelion)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nall\'e1ma}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 nallama}{\f1  "echo" }{\i\f1 (LAM)
\par }{\f1 \tab [}{\b\f1 nalm\'eb}{\f1 ]  }{\i\f1 ("\'f1")}{\f1  "clamour" }{\i\f1 (\'d1GAL/\'d1GALAM}{\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'d1altariel}{\f1  true Quenya form of }{\i\f1 Galadriel}{\f1 ; the form actually used was }{\b\f1 Altariel}{\f1 , Quenyarized from Telerin }{\b\f1 Alat\'e1riel}{\f1 (}{\b\f1 l\'eb}{\f1 ). }{\i\f1 (PM:347)}{\f1 
\par \tab #}{\b\f1 nam}{\f1 - "judge", attested in the 1st person aorist: }{\b\f1 namin}{\f1  "I judge" }{\i\f1 (VT41:13)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 n\'e1ma}{\f1  "a judgement" or "a desire" }{\i\f1 (VT41:13)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 n\'e1mi\'eb}{\f1  "(a single) judgement", "(a single) desire" }{\i\f1 (VT41:13)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\f1  "farewell" (}{\i\f1 Nam}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 RGEO:67)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab namba}{\f1  "a hammer" }{\i\f1 (NDAM)}{\f1 , verb }{\b\f1 namba}{\f1 - "to hammer"}{\i\f1  (NDAM)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Nambarauto}{\f1  "hammerer of copper [> metal]", masc. name (S }{\i\f1 Damrod}{\f1 )}{\i\f1  (RAUT\'c2)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab namna}{\f1  "statute"; }{\b\f1 Namna Finw\'eb M\'edriello}{\f1  "the Statute of Finw\'eb and M\'edriel" }{\i\f1 (MR:258)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab N\'e1mo}{\f1  (1) "Judge", name of a Vala, normally called }{\b\f1 Mandos}{\f1 , properly the place where he dwells }{\i\f1 (WJ:402)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'e1mo}{\f1  (2) "a person, somebody" }{\i\f1 (PM:340 - use rather }{\b\i\f1 quen}{\i\f1  to avoid confusion with # 1)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nan}{\f1  "but" }{\i\f1 (FS)}{\f1 ; the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1  also gives }{\b\f1 n\'e1}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 n\'e1n}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (NDAN)}{\f1 , but these words may be confused with forms of the verb "to be", so }{\b\f1 nan}{\f1 
 should perhaps be preferred.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nan}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 nand}{\f1 -) "woodland" }{\i\f1 (LT1:261)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nan}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (prefix)}{\f1  "backwards"}{\i\f1  (NDAN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Nanar}{\f1  "Green-elves, *Danians", sg. *}{\b\f1 Nana}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (DAN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nanda}{\f1  "water-mead, watered plain" }{\i\f1 (NAD)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nanda}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("\'f1")}{\f1  "to harp" }{\i\f1 (\'d1GAN/\'d1G\'c1NAD)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nandaro}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("\'f1")}{\f1  "harper" }{\i\f1 (\'d1GAN/\'d1G\'c1NAD)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nand\'eb}{\f1  (1) "valley" in }{\b\f1 Laurenand\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (UT:253)}{\f1 ; also }{\b\f1 nan}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 nand}{\f1 - "valley" }{\i\f1 (Letters:308)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Nan-Tasarion}{\f1  "Vale of Willows" }{\i\f1 (LotR2:III ch. 4) }{\f1 
(Note that this and the next }{\b\f1 nand\'eb}{\f1  would be spelt differently in Tengwar writing, and originally they were also pronounced differently, since }{\b\f1 nand\'eb}{\f1  "harp" was }{\b\f1 \'f1and\'eb}{\f1  in First Age Quenya.)}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nand\'eb}{\f1  (2) }{\i\f1 ("\'f1")}{\f1  "harp" }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (\'d1GAN/\'d1G\'c1NAD)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nandel\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("\'f1")}{\f1  "harping" }{\i\f1 (\'d1GAN/\'d1G\'c1NAD)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nandell\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("\'f1")}{\f1  "little harp" }{\i\f1 (\'d1GAN/\'d1G\'c1NAD)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nandin}{\f1  "fay of the country" }{\i\f1 (LT1:261)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab }{\f1 #}{\b\f1 Nando}{\f1  pl. }{\b\f1 Nandor}{\f1  name of the Green-elves (}{\b\f1 Laiquendi}{\f1 ). The primitive word *}{\i\f1 ndand\'f4}{\f1 , whence Quenya }{\b\f1 Nando}{\f1 
, implied "one who goes back on his word or decision", since the Nandor left the March from Cuivi\'e9nen to Aman. Adj. }{\b\f1 Nandorin}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (WJ:412)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nangwa}{\f1  "jaw" }{\i\f1 (NAK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'e1r}{\f1  "flame", also }{\b\f1 n\'e1r\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (NAR}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 .}{\i\f1  }{\f1 Translated "fire" in some names, see }{\b\f1 Aican\'e1ro}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 F\'eban\'e1ro}{\f1  (where }{\b\f1 n\'e1r}{\f1 
 apparently has the masculine ending -}{\b\f1 o}{\f1 )}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab naraca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "harsh, rending, violent" }{\i\f1 (N\'c1RAK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab narci}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "to rend" }{\i\f1 (N\'c1RAK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab narda}{\f1  "knot"}{\i\f1  (SNAR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'e1r\'eb}{\f1 , also short }{\b\f1 n\'e1r}{\f1 , "flame" }{\i\f1 (NAR}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 , Narqelion)}{\f1 . Translated "fire" in some names, see }{\b\f1 Aican\'e1ro}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 F\'eban\'e1ro}{\f1  (where }{\b\f1 n\'e1r}{\f1 
 apparently has the masculine ending -}{\b\f1 o}{\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab N\'e1ri\'eb}{\f1  sixth month of the year, "June" }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)}{\f1 ; derived from the stem }{\i\f1 (a)nar}{\f1 - having to do with fire or sun.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Narmacil}{\f1  masc. name, *"Flame-sword" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab narmo}{\f1   }{\i\f1 ("\'f1")}{\f1  "wolf" }{\i\f1 (\'d1GAR(A)M; both the old form }{\b\i\f1 \'f1armo}{\i\f1  = *}{\b\i\f1 ngarmo}{\i\f1  and the Third Age form }{\b\i\f1 narmo}{\i\f1  are given)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Narqueli\'eb}{\f1  tenth month of the year, "October" }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)}{\f1 ; the word seems to mean "Fire-waning", "Sun-waning". Compare }{\b\f1 narquelion}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1 , q.v.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Narquelion}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "fire-fading, autumn"}{\i\f1  (FS, Narqelion, KWEL, (LAS}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 ) )}{\f1 ; simply translated "Fading" in LR:72.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Narsil}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) the sword of Elendil, compound of the stems seen in }{\b\f1 Anar}{\f1  "Sun" and }{\b\f1 Isil}{\f1  "Moon"; see Letters:425 for etymology
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Narsilion}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "(the song) of the Sun and Moon"; actually the stems of the words for Sun and Moon compounded (see }{\b\f1 Narsil}{\f1  above) and a plural genitive ending added }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Narviny\'eb}{\f1  first month of the year, "January". The word seems to mean "New Fire/Sun". }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Narya}{\f1  name of the Red Ring, the Ring of Fire; apparently properly an adjective, so that the  meaning is something like "Fiery (One)"}{\i\f1  (SA:n\'e1r)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nasar}{\f1  "red" (in Vanyarin Quenya only). Adopted and adapted from Valarin. }{\i\f1 (WJ:399)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nass\'eb}{\f1  "thorn, spike" }{\i\f1 (NAS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nasta}{\f1  "spear-head, point, gore, triangle" }{\i\f1 (SNAS/SNAT)}{\f1 , "prick, point, stick, thrust"}{\i\f1  (NAS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nasta}{\f1 - "prick, sting"}{\i\f1  (NAS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nat}{\f1  "thing"}{\i\f1  (N\'c2}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nats\'eb}{\f1  "web, net" }{\i\f1 (NAT)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nauca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "stunted" }{\i\f1 (VT39:7)}{\f1 , adjective especially applied to things that though in themselves full-grown were smaller or shorter than their kind, and were hard, twisted or ill-shapen }{\i\f1 (WJ:413) }{
\f1 In early "Qenya", }{\b\f1 nauca}{\f1  was the noun "dwarf" }{\i\f1 (LT1:261)}{\f1 , but this noun is rather }{\b\f1 nauco}{\f1  in Tolkien's later Quenya.}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Nauco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "Dwarf" (capitalized in WJ:388, but not in Etym, stem }{\i\f1 NAUK}{\f1 ). }{\b\f1 Naucali\'eb }{\f1 (not *}{\i\f1 Naucoli\'eb)}{\f1  the "Dwarf-people" as a whole. From }{\b\f1 nauca}{\f1 . See also }{\b\f1 
Picinaucor}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab naul\'eb}{\f1  "wolf-howl" }{\i\f1 (\'d1GAW; this must represent earlier *}{\b\i\f1 \'f1aul\'eb}{\i\f1  = *}{\b\i\f1 ngaul\'eb}{\i\f1 ; these forms are not given in Etym, but compare }{\b\i\f1 \'f1auro}{\i\f1  below. In Tengwar wr
iting, the initial N would be represented by the letter }{\f1 noldo}{\i\f1 , not }{\f1 n\'famen}{\i\f1 .)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nauro}{\f1   }{\i\f1 ("\'f1")}{\f1  "werewolf" }{\i\f1 (\'d1GAW)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab naus\'eb}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "imagination" }{\i\f1 (NOWO)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nauta}{\f1  "bound, obliged" }{\i\f1 (NUT)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b nauva}{ "will be" }{\i (VT42:34)}{; see }{\b n\'e1}{.
\par #}{\b nav}{- "judge" (cited in the form }{\b nav\'eb}{, apparently the 3rd person aorist). Also given with pronominal suffixes: }{\b navin}{ *"I judge" (Tolkien's free translation: "I think"), }{\b navilw\'eb}{ "we judge" (}{\i VT42:34)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab n\'e1va}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("\'f1")}{\f1  "mouth", apparently not only the lips but also the inside of the mouth }{\i\f1 (VT39:13 cf. 8)}{\f1 . Possibly, 
but probably not, the same element that is translated "hollow" in }{\b\f1 N\'e1varot}{\f1 , q.v.
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 N\'e1varot}{\f1  "Nogrod" (< Novrod), Hollowbold, name of a dwelling of the Dwarves }{\i\f1 (WJ:389)}{\f1 . If the element that is here translated }{\b\f1 n\'e1va}{\f1  is the same as }{\b\f1 n\'e1va}
{\f1  "mouth", the initial }{\b\f1 n}{\f1  comes from earlier}{\i\f1  ng (\'f1)}{\f1  and should be represented by the letter }{\i\f1 noldo}{\f1  rather than }{\i\f1 n\'famen}{\f1 
 in Tengwar writing. However, Tolkien in WJ:414 reconstructs the primitive form of the }{\b\f1 n\'e1va}{\f1  in }{\b\f1 N\'e1varot}{\f1  as *}{\i\f1 n\'e2b\'e2}{\f1  rather than **}{\i\f1 ng\'e2b\'e2}{\f1  or **}{\i\f1 ng\'e2w\'e2}{\f1 
 (the likely source of }{\b\f1 n\'e1va}{\f1  "mouth"), so this appears doubtful. The initial }{\b\f1 n}{\f1  of }{\b\f1 N\'e1varot}{\f1  should evidently be represented by the letter }{\i\f1 n\'famen}{\f1  in Tengwar writing.
\par }{\b\f1 N\'e1vatar}{\f1  a title of Aul\'eb referring to his position as the immediate author of the Dwarvish race, apparently including }{\b\f1 atar}{\f1  "father", but the first element cannot be related to any known term for "Dwarf" }{\i\f1 
(PM:391 cf. 381)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 n\'e1va-tengw\'eb }{\f1 *"mouth-sign" = "consonant" considered as a phoneme (only pl. }{\b\f1 n\'e1va-tengwi}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ["\'f1\'e1va}{\f1 -}{\i\f1 "]}{\f1  is attested). Also #}{\b\f1 n\'e1v\'eba}{\f1 . F\'ebanor later substituted the term #}{
\b\f1 pataca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (VT39:8)}{\f1 
\par #}{\b\f1 n\'e1v\'eba}{\f1  "consonant" (only pl. }{\b\f1 n\'e1v\'ebar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ["\'f1"]}{\f1  is attested) }{\i\f1 (VT39:8)}{\f1 
\par -}{\b\f1 ndil}{\f1  (also -}{\b\f1 dil}{\f1 ) ending in many names, like }{\b\f1 Amandil}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 E\'e4rendil}{\f1 ; it implies devotion or disinterested love and may be translated "friend" }{\i\f1 (SA:(n)dil)}{\f1 ; this ending is "describing th
e attitude of one to a person, thing, course or occupation to which one is devoted for its own sake" }{\i\f1 (Letters:386)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab -}{\b\f1 ndor}{\f1  "land" in compounds }{\i\f1 (Letters:308, UT:253) }{\f1 
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 ndur}{\f1  (also -}{\b\f1 dur}{\f1 ) ending in some names, like }{\b\f1 E\'e4rendur}{\f1 ; as noted by Christopher Tolkien in the Silmarillion Appendix it has much the same meaning as -}{\b\f1 ndil}{\f1  "friend"; yet -}{\b\f1 ndur}{\f1 
 properly means "servant of" }{\i\f1 (SA:(n)dil)}{\f1 , "as one serves a legitimate master: cf. Q. }{\i\f1 arandil}{\f1  king's friend, royalist, beside }{\i\f1 arandur}{\f1  'king's servant, minister'. But these of
ten coincide: e.g. Sam's relation to Frodo can be viewed either as in status -}{\i\f1 ndur}{\f1 , in spirit -}{\i\f1 ndil}{\f1 ." }{\i\f1 (Letters:286)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ne}{\f1  ??? = }{\b\f1 n-}{\f1  in }{\b\f1 n-alalmino}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Narqelion) }{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ne-s\'fam\'eb}{\f1  ??? }{\i\f1 (Narqelion)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'eba}{\f1  an optative form of the verb }{\b\f1 na}{\f1 - "to be"? }{\i\f1 (}{\b\i\f1 n\'eba}{\i\f1  = LotR-style Quenya }{\b\i\f1 nai}{\i\f1 ?)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 ya rato n\'eba}{\f1  *"which soon may (it) be" = *"which I hope will be soon" }{
\i\f1 (Arct)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'e9ca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "pale, vague, faint, dim to see", pl. }{\b\f1 n\'e9c\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nect\'eb}{\f1  "honey" }{\i\f1 (LT1:262; Tolkien's later Quenya has }{\b\i\f1 lis}{\i\f1 ; otherwise, }{\b\i\f1 nect\'eb}{\i\f1  would have had to become }{\b\i\f1 neht\'eb}{\i\f1 
, but this word means "spearhead, gore, wedge, narrow promontory" in LotR-style Quenya [UT:282].)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nehta}{\f1  "spearhead", isolated from }{\b\f1 nernehta}{\f1 , q.v.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab neht\'eb}{\f1  any formation or projection tapering to a point: a spearhead, gore, wedge, narrow promontory }{\i\f1 (UT:282)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 neit\'eb}{\f1  "wax" }{\i\f1 (GL:60; rather }{\b\i\f1 l\'edco}{\i\f1  in Tolkien's later Quenya. The status of the diphthong }{\b\i\f1 ei}{\i\f1 
 is uncertain; in the LotR appendices, Tolkien did not list }{\b\i\f1 ei}{\i\f1  among the Quenya diphthongs, so perhaps the word }{\b\i\f1 neit\'eb}{\i\f1  from an early source is conceptually obsolete.)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab nel}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (prefix)}{\f1  "tri-" }{\i\f1 (NEL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nelci}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  pl. of }{\b\f1 nelet}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (N\'c9L-EK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab neld\'eb}{\f1  "three" }{\i\f1 (SA:neldor, N\'c9L-ED)}{\f1 . Cf. }{\b\f1 nelya}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 neld\'eba}{\f1 .
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b neld\'eba}{ ordinal "third" }{\i (VT42:25)}{; also }{\b nelya}{. Cf. }{\b neld\'eb}{.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Neldion}{\f1  *"Day of the three [younger gods]", sc. Osse, Orome and Tulkas }{\i\f1 (LEP/LEPEN/LEPEK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab neldor}{\f1  "beech" }{\i\f1 (LT2:343)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nelet}{\f1  pl. }{\b\f1 nelci}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "tooth" }{\i\f1 (N\'c9L-EK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nell\'eb}{\f1  "brook" }{\i\f1 (NEN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab neltil}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 neltild}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 neltildi}{\f1 ) "triangle" }{\i\f1 (TIL, NEL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nelya}{\f1  "third" }{\i (VT42:25; also }{\b\i neld\'eba}{\i ).}{\f1  Pl. }{\b\f1 Nelyar }{\f1 "Thirds", the original name of the Noldor (or rather the direct Quenya descendant of the original Primitive Quendian name) }{\i\f1 (WJ:380)}{\f1 .

\par }{\b\f1 \tab Nelyafinw\'eb}{\f1  "Finw\'eb third" (after the original Finw\'eb and Curufinw\'eb = F\'ebanor), masc. name; he was called }{\i\f1 Maedhros}{\f1  in Sindarin. Short Quenya name }{\b\f1 Nelyo}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (PM:352)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Nelyo}{\f1  see }{\b\f1 Nelyafinw\'eb
\par \tab }{\f1 [#}{\b\f1 nem}{\f1 - verb "judge", attested as endingless aorist}{\b\f1  }{\b nem\'eb}{, corrected by Tolkien to }{\b ham\'eb}{ and finally to }{\b nav\'eb}{ "in all but one case" (Bill Welden). Forms like }{\b n\'e1mo}{ "judge" and }{\b namna}
{ "statute" point rather to #}{\b nam}{- as a verb for "judge" }{\i (VT42:34)}{]}{\b\f1 
\par \tab nen}{\f1  "river" }{\i\f1 (LT1:248)}{\f1 , "river, water" }{\i\f1 (LT1:262) (In LotR-style Quenya, }{\b\i\f1 n\'e9n}{\i\f1  with a long vowel means "water", but hardly "river" - that is }{\b\i\f1 s\'edr\'eb}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
\par \tab }{\f1 -}{\b\f1 nen}{\f1  instrumental ending (pl. -}{\b\f1 inen}{\f1 , dual -}{\b\f1 nten}{\f1 , partitive pl. -}{\b\f1 l\'ednen}{\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'e9n}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 nen}{\f1 -) "water" }{\i\f1 (NEN)}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab N\'e9nar}{\f1  name of a star (or planet), evidently derived from }{\b\f1 n\'e9n}{\f1  "water" }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 , tentatively identified with Uranus }{\i\f1 (MR:435)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nenda}{\f1  (1) "watery, wet" }{\i\f1 (NEN)
\par }{\f1 \tab [}{\b\f1 nenda}{\f1 ] (2) "sloping" }{\i\f1 (DEN, struck out)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nend\'eb}{\f1  (1) "pool"}{\i\f1  (NEN)
\par }{\f1 \tab [}{\b\f1 nend\'eb}{\f1 ] (2) "slope"}{\i\f1  (DEN, struck out)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Nendili}{\f1  "Water-lovers", the most frequently used "title" or secondary name of the Lindar (Teleri) }{\i\f1 (WJ:411)}{\f1  Sg. #}{\b\f1 Nendil}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nengw\'eb}{\f1  "nose", pl. }{\b\f1 nengwi}{\f1  given }{\i\f1 (NE\'d1-WI)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nengw\'eba}{\f1  "nasal" }{\i\f1 (NE\'d1-WI)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab N\'e9nim\'eb}{\f1  second month of the year, "February" }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'e9nu}{\f1  "yellow water-lily"}{\i\f1  (LT1:248)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'e9nuvar}{\f1  "pool of lilles"}{\i\f1  (LT1:248)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Nenya}{\f1  name of the Blue Ring, apparently properly an adjective meaning something like "Watery [One]" }{\i\f1 (SA:nen)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'e9r}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 ner}{\f1 -, as in pl.}{\b\f1  neri}{\f1 ) "man" (adult male - elf, mortal, or of other speaking race) }{\i\f1 (MR:213, DER, NDER, NI}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 ; see also WJ:393)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Nermi}{\f1  "a field-spirit" }{\i\f1 (LT1:262)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nernehta}{\f1  "man-spearhead", a battle-formation }{\i\f1 (UT:282)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nert\'eb}{\f1  "nine"}{\i\f1  (N\'c9TER; }{\i (VT42:26)}{; }{\b nert\'eba}{ ordinal "nineth" }{\i (VT42:25)}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'e9s\'eb}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "youth", also }{\b\f1 ness\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (NETH)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nessa}{\f1  "young"}{\i\f1  (NETH)}{\f1 , also}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 Nessa}{\f1  as name of a Vali\'eb, the spouse of Tulkas (adopted and adapted from Valarin, OR an archaic Elvish formation: WJ:404 vs. 416). Also called }{\b\f1 Indis}{\f1 
, "bride" }{\i\f1 (NETH, NI}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nessamelda}{\f1  "Nessa-beloved", name of a tree }{\i\f1 (UT:167)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Nessaron}{\f1  *"[Day] of the younger [gods]", sc. Oss\'eb, Orom\'eb and Tulkas (in Tolkien's earlier conception, Oss\'eb was a "god" or Vala).}{\i\f1  (LEP/LEPEN/LEPEK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ness\'eb}{\f1  "youth"; also }{\b\f1 n\'e9s\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (NETH)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nessima}{\f1  "youthful"}{\i\f1  (NETH)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab neuma}{\f1  "snare"}{\i\f1  (SNEW)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab neuna}{\f1  "second" }{\i\f1 (NDEW)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab neuro}{\f1  "follower, successor" }{\i\f1 (NDEW)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 #}{\b\f1 nav}{\f1 - verb "judge"; 1st person aorist }{\b\f1 navin}{\f1  "I judge"; 1st person pl. inclusive }{\b navilwe}{ "we judge" }{\i (VT42:33, 34)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab ngoldo}{\f1  see }{\b\f1 noldo}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ngwalm\'eb}{\f1  see }{\b\f1 nwalm\'eb}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ni}{\f1  "I", dative }{\b\f1 nin}{\f1  "for me, to me" (}{\i\f1 Arct, Nam}{\f1 ,}{\i\f1  RGEO:67, VT41:11/15)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab }{\f1 \'86}{\b\f1 n\'ed}{\f1  "woman, female" }{\i\f1 (NI}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 , INI (N\'caR ) )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nicu-}{\i\f1  ("k")}{\f1  "be chill, cold (of weather)" }{\i\f1 (WJ:417)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ni\'eb}{\f1  "tear" }{\i\f1 (NEI, LT1:262, LT2:346); apparently }{\b\i\f1 n\'ede}{\i\f1  in MC:221}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Nieliccilis}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "little Ni\'e9le"}{\i\f1  (MC:215; this is "Qenya")}{\b\f1 
\par \tab Niell\'fan\'eb}{\f1  "Sirius" (a star), also }{\b\f1 Nierninwa}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (LT1:262)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nienait\'eb }{\f1 "bleared" }{\i\f1 (MC:214),}{\f1  *"tearfully"??? (see }{\b\f1 cild\'eb}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (MC:221; this is "Qenya")}{\b\f1 
\par \tab nieninqu\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "snowdrop", etymologically "white tear" }{\i\f1 (NIK-W, LT1:262, 266)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nieninqu\'eba}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  adj. "snowdrop-like" }{\i\f1 (MC:215)}{\b\f1 
\par \tab Nienna}{\f1  (name of a Vali\'eb, related to }{\b\f1 ni\'eb}{\f1  = tear) }{\i\f1 (NEI)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nier}{\f1  "honey-bee" }{\i\f1 (LT1:262)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nierm\'eb}{\f1  ??? }{\i\f1 (Narqelion)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Nierninwa}{\f1  "Sirius" (a star), also }{\b\f1 Niell\'fan\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (LT1:262)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nierwes}{\f1  "hive" }{\i\f1 (LT1:262)}{\f1 
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 nil}{\f1  = Old English "-wine", sc. "-friend" as an element in names }{\i\f1 (NIL/NDIL)}{\f1 . Variant of -}{\b\f1 ndil}{\f1 . In }{\b\f1 E\'e4rnil}{\f1 , contraction of }{\b\f1 Earendil}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nilda}{\f1  "friendly, loving" }{\i\f1 (NIL/NDIL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nild\'eb}{\f1  "friend" (fem.) }{\i\f1 (NIL/NDIL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nildo}{\f1  "friend" (apparently masc.; contrast }{\b\f1 nild\'eb}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (NIL/NDIL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nill\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("\'f1")}{\f1  a star-imagine on }{\b\f1 Nur-menel}{\f1  (q.v.), from a stem }{\i\f1 ngil}{\f1 - "silver glint" }{\i\f1 (MR:388)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nilm\'eb}{\f1  "friendship" }{\i\f1 (NIL/NDIL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nilmo}{\f1  "friend" (apparently masc.)}{\i\f1  (NIL/NDIL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nin}{\f1  "to me", dative of }{\b\f1 ni}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (FS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nind\'eb}{\f1  "fragile, thin"}{\i\f1  (NIN-DI)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ninquan\'e9ron}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "white shining" }{\i\f1 (MC:220; this is "Qenya")}{\b\f1 
\par \tab ninqu\'eb}{\f1  "white, chill, palid" }{\i\f1 (WJ:417, SA:nim, NIK-W - spelt "ninqe" in Etym and in LT1:266, MC:213, MC:220, GL:60)}{\f1 , pl. }{\b\f1 ninqui}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Ninquel\'f3t\'eb}{\f1  *"White-Flower" }{\i\f1 
(SA:nim)}{\f1 , = Sindarin }{\i\f1 Nimloth}{\f1 , the White Tree of N\'famenor; }{\b\f1 ninqueruviss\'eb }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "white-horse-on" }{\i\f1 (MC:216; this is "Qenya", read *}{\b\i\f1 ninqueroccoss\'eb}{\i\f1  or *}{\b\i\f1 ninquiroccoss\'eb }{
\i\f1 in LotR-style Quenya)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ninquiss\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "whiteness" }{\i\f1 (NIK-W)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ninquita}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "shine white" }{\i\f1 (NIK-W)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ninquit\'e1}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "whiten" }{\i\f1 (NIK-W)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ninwa}{\f1  "blue" }{\i\f1 (LT1:262)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ninya}{\f1  an element occurring in }{\i\f1 F\'edriel's Song}{\f1 , evidently meaning "my"; see }{\b\f1 indo-ninya}{\f1 . 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 nion}{\f1  "bee" }{\i\f1 (GL:60)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab niqu\'eb}{\f1  "it is cold, it freezes" }{\i\f1 (WJ:417)}{\f1 , also noun }{\b\f1 niqu\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "snow" }{\i\f1 (NIK-W)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab niquetil}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "snowcap" }{\i\f1 (LT1:266)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab niquis}{\f1  "frost-patterns", also }{\b\f1 niquess\'eb}{\f1  by association with }{\b\f1 quess\'eb}{\f1  "feather" }{\i\f1 (WJ:417)}{\f1 . In early "Qenya", the gloss was simply "snow" }{\i\f1 (LT1:266)}{\f1 .}{\b\f1 
\par \tab n\'edra}{\f1  "will" (as a potential or faculty) }{\i\f1 (VT39:30, VT41:6, 17)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 n\'edr\'eb}{\f1  "tear" }{\i\f1 (NEI)}{\f1 
\par #}{\b\f1 nir}{\f1 - "press, thrust, force (in a given direction)" ("Though applicable to the pressure of a person on others, by mind and 'will' as well as by physical strength, [this verb] could also 
be used of physical pressures exerted by inanimates".) Given as a 1st person aorist }{\b\f1 nirin}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (VT41:17)}{\f1 . Pa.t. probably *}{\b\f1 nind\'eb}{\f1  since the R of }{\b\f1 nir}{\f1 - was originally D }{\i\f1 
(the base is given as NID; compare }{\b\i\f1 rer}{\i\f1 - pa.t. }{\b\i\f1 rend\'eb}{\i\f1  from RED concerning the past tense)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 nirm\'eb}{\f1  "an act of will, exercise of will" }{\i\f1 (VT39:30, VT41:6)}{\f1 , "the act or action of }{\i\f1 n\'edra}{\f1 " }{\i\f1 (VT41:17)}{\b\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab nirwa}{\f1  "bolster, cushion" }{\i\f1 (NID)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'eds}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 niss}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 nissi}{\f1 ) "woman" }{\i\f1 (MR:213. The }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1  gives }{\b\i\f1 nis}{\i\f1  (or }{\b\i\f1 niss\'eb}{\i\f1 ) pl. }{\b\i\f1 nissi}{\i\f1 : see the stems NDIS-S\'ca/S\'c2
, NI}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 , NIS (N\'caR). However, the MR forms are to be preferred.)}{\f1 
\par \tab #}{\b\f1 n\'edsima}{\f1  "fragrant", isolated from }{\b\f1 N\'edsimaldar}{\f1 , q.v.}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab N\'edsimaldar}{\f1  "Fragrant trees", a region in N\'famenor }{\i\f1 (UT:167; evidently #}{\b\i\f1 n\'edsima}{\i\f1  "fragrant", attested here only, + }{\b\i\f1 aldar}{\i\f1  "trees")}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab N\'edsinen}{\f1  *"Fragrance-water", a like in N\'famenor }{\i\f1 (UT:168)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'edt\'eb}{\f1  "moist, dewy" }{\i\f1 (NEI)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'edv\'eb }{\f1 "pale" }{\i\f1 (MC:213; this is "Qenya" - Tolkien's later Quenya has }{\b\i\f1 n\'e9ca}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nix\'eb}{\f1  "frost" }{\i\f1 (WJ:417)}{\f1 
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 nna}{\f1  "to, upon", allative ending in }{\b\f1 cilyanna}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Endorenna}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Elendilenna}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Elenna}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 n\'famenna}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 n\'famen\'f3renna}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 r\'f3menna}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tielyanna
}{\f1 , q.v. Plural -}{\b\f1 nnar}{\f1  in }{\b\f1 mannar}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 valannar}{\f1 , q.v.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab no}{\f1  "under" }{\i\f1 (N\'db; all other sources give }{\b\i\f1 nu}{\i\f1  instead. In early "Qenya", }{\b\i\f1 no}{\i\f1  meant "upon"; MC:214) }{\b\f1 
\par \tab n\'f3}{\f1  (1) (stem }{\b\f1 n\'f3w}{\f1 - as in pl. }{\b\f1 n\'f3wi}{\f1 ) "conception" (= idea)}{\i\f1  (NOWO)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 n\'f3}{\f1  (2) conjunction "but" }{\i\f1 (VT41:13)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab noa}{\f1  "conception" (= idea) }{\i\f1 (NOWO)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab N\'f3coir\'eb}{\f1  alternative name of March }{\i\f1 (PM:135)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab noi}{\f1  "lament" }{\i\f1 (NAY)}{\f1 
\par \tab #}{\b\f1 noir\'eb}{\f1  "tomb", isolated from }{\b\f1 Noirinan}{\f1 , q.v.}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Noirinan}{\f1  the "Valley of the Tombs" in N\'famenor (evidently *}{\b\f1 noir\'eb}{\f1 , *}{\b\f1 noiri}{\f1 - "tomb" + }{\b\f1 nan}{\f1  "valley") }{\i\f1 (UT:166)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'f3la}{\f1   }{\i\f1 ("\'f1")}{\f1  (1) "wise, learned" }{\i\f1 (\'d1GOL)}{\f1  (note that this and the next }{\b\f1 n\'f3la}{\f1  would be spelt differently in Tengwar writing, and originally they were also pronounced differently, since }{
\b\f1 n\'f3la}{\f1  "wise, learned" was }{\b\f1 \'f1\'f3la}{\f1  in First Age Quenya).}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'f3la}{\f1  (2) "round head, knoll"}{\i\f1  (NDOL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab N\'f3lair\'eb}{\f1  alternative name of July }{\i\f1 (PM:135)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 noldar\'eb}{\f1  "mole"; also }{\b\f1 nolpa}{\i\f1  (GL:30)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab noldo}{\f1  "one of the people of the Noldor", "one of the wise folk, Gnome". Cf. the gloss "Gnome" in early "Qenya" }{\i\f1 (LT1:262)}{\f1 . Also name of tengwa 19, that is used for the initial }{
\b\f1 n}{\f1  of }{\b\f1 noldo}{\f1  in Tengwar spelling. Originally pronounced }{\b\f1 ngoldo}{\f1  (also spelt }{\b\f1 \'f1oldo}{\f1  by Tolkien, }{\i\f1 \'d1GOLOD}{\f1 ); initial }{\b\f1 ng}{\f1  had become }{\b\f1 n}{\f1  in Third Age pronunciation }{
\i\f1 (Appendix E).}{\f1  Pl. }{\b\f1 Noldor }{\i\f1 ("\'d1oldor")}{\f1 , "the Wise", name of the second clan of the Eldar }{\i\f1 (WJ:380, 381)}{\f1 ; gen. pl. }{\b\f1 Noldoron }{\f1 "of the Noldor" is attested }{\i\f1 (VT39:16)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Noldolant\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (\'f1}{\f1 ) "the Fall of the Noldor" (name of a song) }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\b\f1 
\par \tab Noldomar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (\'f1}{\f1 ) "Gnomeland" }{\i\f1 (LT1:262).}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Noldom\'edr\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (\'f1}{\f1 ) lit. *"Noldo-jewel", another word for Silmaril }{\i\f1 (\'d1GOLOD).}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 Noldo-quentasta}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("\'d1oldo-")}{\f1  "Noldo-history", History of the Noldor
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Nold\'f3ran}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("\'f1")}{\f1  "King of the Noldor" }{\i\f1 (PM:343; evidently }{\b\i\f1 noldo}{\i\f1  + }{\b\i\f1 aran}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Noldorinwa}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (\'f1}{\f1 ) *"Gnomish", Noldorin, adj. "of the Noldor" }{\i\f1 (LT1:262, VT39:16)}{\f1 ; lower-case }{\b\f1 noldorinwa}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 Narqelion}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'f3l\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (\'f1}{\f1 ) "long study (of any subject), lore, knowledge" }{\i\f1 (SA:g\'fbl, also WJ:383 and MR:350, there spelt }{\b\i\f1 \'f1\'f3le}{\i\f1 , the earlier pronunciation. In the }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1 , stem \'d1
GOL, the gloss is "wisdom".)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'f3lem\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (\'f1}{\f1 ) "deep lore, wisdom" }{\i\f1 (LT1:263)}{\f1 . Perhaps replaced by }{\b\f1 Nolm\'eb}{\f1  in Tolkien's later Quenya.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Nolm\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("\'f1")}{\f1  "knowledge, Philosophy (including Science)" }{\i\f1 (PM:360 cf. 344)}{\b\f1 
\par \tab nolmo}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("\'f1")}{\f1  "wise person" }{\i\f1 (PM:360)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Nolofinw\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("\'f1")}{\f1  "Fingolfin" }{\i\f1 (PM:344)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 nolpa}{\f1  "mole"; also }{\b\f1 noldar\'eb}{\i\f1  (GL:30)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab nolw\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("\'f1")}{\f1  "wisdom, secret lore" }{\i\f1 (\'d1GOL)}{\f1 
\par \tab #}{\b\f1 n\'f3m\'eb}{\f1  "place", isolated from }{\b\f1 N\'f3messeron}{\f1 , q.v. Cf. also }{\b\f1 sinom\'eb}{\f1 .
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b N\'f3messeron}{ compound "of place-names", apparently an inflected compound consisting of #}{\b n\'f3m\'eb}{ "place" + a genitive plural #}{\b esseron}{ "of names" }{\i (VT42:17; we might have expected *
}{\b\i ession}{\i , since }{\b\i essi}{\i  rather than ?}{\b\i esser}{\i  as the nominative plural of }{\b\i ess\'eb}{\i  "name" is attested both in PM:339 and MR:470)}{\i\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab N\'f3quell\'eb}{\f1  alternative name of October }{\i\f1 (PM:135)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'f3r}{\f1  "land" (as opposed to sea; }{\b\f1 nor}{\f1  in Letters:308). Longer, more usual form }{\b\f1 n\'f3r\'eb}{\f1 , q.v.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'f3r\'eb}{\f1  "land" (associated with a particular people) }{\i\f1 (WJ:413)}{\f1 , "country, land, dwelling-place, region where certain people live, race, clan" (}{\i\f1 N\'d4, NDOR, BAL}{\f1 ), also used = "people"}{\i\f1  (SA:d\'f4
r; however, the normal word for "people" is }{\b\i\f1 li\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 . Early "Qenya" has}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 n\'f3r\'eb}{\f1  "native land, nation, family, country" (in compounds -}{\b\f1 nor}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (LT1:272)}{\f1  
\par \tab #}{\b\f1 n\'f3ri\'eb}{\f1  "country", in }{\b\f1 sindan\'f3ri\'eb}{\f1  (see }{\b\f1 sinda}{\f1 ) (}{\i\f1 Nam}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 RGEO:67)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab norna}{\f1  "stiff, tough" }{\i\f1 (WJ:413)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab norno}{\f1  (1) "oak" }{\i\f1 (D\'d3RON)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Norno}{\f1  (2) "dwarf"; a personalized form of the adjective }{\b\f1 norna}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ:413)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Nornali\'eb }{\f1 (not *}{\i\f1 Nornoli\'eb)}{\f1  the "Dwarf-people" as a whole }{\i\f1 (WJ:388)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nornoro}{\f1 - "run on, run smoothly" }{\i\f1 (LT1:263)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab norolind\'eb }{\f1 "tripping lightly"}{\i\f1  (MC:215; this is "Qenya")
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 noroll\'eb}{\f1  "cart" }{\i\f1 (GL:31)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Norr\'edv\'eb}{\f1  alternative name of December }{\i\f1 (PM:135)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab norsa}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "giant" }{\i\f1 (NOROTH)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab noss\'eb}{\f1  "clan, family, 'house' "}{\i\f1  (N\'d4)}{\f1 , "kindred, family" }{\i\f1 (PM:320)}{\f1 , "kin, people" }{\i\f1 (LT1:250, LT1:272, LT2:338)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nosta}{\f1  "birth, birthday" }{\i\f1 (LT1:272)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nosta}{\f1 - "beget" }{\i\f1 (SD:73}{\f1 ); in earlier "Qenya" the gloss was "give birth" }{\i\f1 (LT1:272)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nostal\'eb}{\f1  "species, kind" }{\i\f1 (LT1:272)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nostari}{\f1  "parents", pl. of *}{\b\f1 nostar}{\f1  or *}{\b\f1 nostaro}{\f1  "parent" }{\i\f1 (LotR3:VI ch. 6, translated in Letters:308)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab not}{\f1 - "reckon" }{\i\f1 (NOT)}{\f1 ; past participle }{\b\f1 n\'f3tina}{\f1  "counted, *reckoned" }{\i\f1 (FS)}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'f3t\'eb}{\f1  "number"}{\i\f1  (NOT)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab N\'f3tuil\'eb}{\f1  alternative name of May }{\i\f1 (PM:135)}{\f1 
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 nt}{\f1  ending for dual dative }{\i\f1 (Plotz)}{\f1 
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 nta}{\f1  ending for dual allative }{\i\f1 (Plotz)}{\f1 . May also be the possessive ending "their", corresponding to the ending -}{\b\f1 nt\'eb}{\f1  "they".
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 nt\'eb}{\f1  pronomimal ending, inflexion of 3 plural ("they") when no subject is previously mentioned }{\i\f1 (CO)
\par }{\f1 \tab -}{\b\f1 nten}{\f1  ending for dual instrumental }{\i\f1 (Plotz)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nu}{\f1  "under" }{\i\f1 (LR:56, Markirya, Nam, RGEO:66, MC:214; the }{\f1 Etymologies }{\i\f1 alone gives }{\b\i\f1 no}{\i\f1  [q.v.] instead)}{\b\f1 
\par \tab N\'faaran}{\f1  *"West-king"; }{\b\f1 N\'faaran N\'famenoren}{\f1  *"West-king of N\'famenor"; changed (according to LR:71) to }{\b\f1 N\'fararan N\'famenen}{\f1 , *"West-king of the West" (all of this is "Qenya" with genitive in }{\b\f1 -n}{\f1 
 instead of -}{\b\f1 o}{\f1 , as in Tolkien's later Quenya) }{\i\f1 (LR:60)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nucumna}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "humbled" }{\i\f1 (SD:246)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nuhta}{\f1 - "stunt, prevent from coming to completion, stop short, not allow to continue" }{\i\f1 (WJ:413)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nuhuinenna}{\f1  "under shadow" (allativic: }{\b\f1 nu-huin\'eb-nna}{\f1  "under-shadow-to") }{\i\f1 (SD:246)}{\f1 ; see }{\b\f1 huin\'eb}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nulda}{\f1  "secret" }{\i\f1 (DUL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nulla}{\f1  "dark, dusky, obscure" }{\i\f1 (NDUL)}{\f1 , "secret"}{\i\f1  (DUL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'fam\'eb}{\f1  "going down, occident" }{\i\f1 (Letters:361).}{\f1  Apparently meaning "west" in }{\b\f1 n\'fameheruen}{\f1  and }{\b\f1 numeheruvi}{\f1 ; indeed }{\b\f1 n\'fam\'eb}{\f1  was glossed "West" in early "Qenya" }{\i\f1 (LT1:263).
}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'fam\'eba}{\f1  "in the West" }{\i\f1 (actually an adjective *"western", in Tolkien's later Quenya rather }{\b\i\f1 n\'famenya}{\i\f1 )}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (LT1:263)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'fameheruen}{\f1  *"of the Lord of the West" (Manw\'eb) (SD:290); this is "Qenya" with genitive in -}{\b\f1 en}{\f1  instead of -}{\b\f1 o}{\f1  as in LotR-style Quenya.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'fameheruvi}{\f1  "Lords-of-West" (*"West-lords") in SD:246
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'famen}{\f1  "west, the way of the sunset"}{\i\f1  (SA:and\'fan\'eb, cf. ND\'db, MEN; capitalized }{\b\i\f1 N\'famen}{\i\f1  under SA:men and in CO)}{\f1 , "going down, occudent" }{\i\f1 (Letters:361)}{\f1 , also name of tengwa 17 }{\i\f1 
(Appendix E). }{\f1 Allative }{\b\f1 n\'famenna}{\f1  "Westward" }{\i\f1 (LR:47, SD:310) }{\f1 See also }{\b\f1 n\'famenyaron}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 n\'famessier}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab N\'famen(n)\'f3r\'eb}{\f1  "people of the west", confused with }{\b\f1 N\'famendor}{\f1  "land of the west" }{\i\f1 (SA:d\'f4r)}{\f1 ; hence }{\b\f1 N\'famenor}{\f1  as the name of the great isle given to the Edain by the Valar }{\i\f1 
(FS, LR:56)}{\f1 ; full form }{\b\f1 N\'famen\'f3r\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (LR:47, SD:247, ND\'db)}{\f1 ; allative }{\b\f1 n\'famen\'f3renna}{\f1  "to N\'famenor" }{\i\f1 (LR:56)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab numenda}{\f1 - "get low (of the Sun)" (also }{\b\f1 n\'fameta}{\f1 -) }{\i\f1 (LT1:263; in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 n\'fata}{\i\f1 -)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab N\'famendor}{\f1  "land of the west", confused with and replaced by }{\b\f1 N\'famen(n)\'f3r\'eb}{\f1  "people of the west" }{\i\f1 (SA:d\'f4r)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'famenya}{\f1  "western" }{\i\f1 (ND\'db)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'famenyaron}{\f1  a word occurring in a phrase from an earlier version of }{\i\f1 F\'edriel's Song}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Valion n\'famenyaron}{\f1 , "of the Lords [Valar] of the West". But }{\b\f1 n\'famenyaron}{\f1 
 cannot simply mean "of the West"; it seems to be the plural genitive of }{\b\f1 n\'famenya}{\f1  "western", hence literally *"of the western (things, persons, realms)" or "of the Westerners".
\par }{\b\f1 \tab N\'famerr\'e1mar}{\f1  "West-wings", name of a ship (}{\b\f1 N\'famen}{\f1  + }{\b\f1 r\'e1mar}{\f1 , note assimilation }{\b\f1 nr}{\f1  > }{\b\f1 rr}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (UT:175)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'famessier}{\f1  "they are in the west", a construction occurring in }{\i\f1 F\'edriel's Song}{\f1 , evidently }{\b\f1 n\'fame}{\f1 (}{\b\f1 n}{\f1 )-}{\b\f1 ss\'eb}{\f1 -}{\b\f1 ie}{\f1 -}{\b\f1 r}{\f1 
 "west-in-are-they"; the stative-verb suffix -}{\b\f1 i\'eb}{\f1  is probably not valid in LotR-style Quenya }{\i\f1 (FS)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'fameta}{\f1 - "get low (of the Sun)" (also }{\b\f1 numenda}{\f1 -) }{\i\f1 (LT1:263; in Tolkien's later Quenya rather }{\b\i\f1 n\'fata}{\i\f1 -)}{\f1 ; inflected }{\b\f1 n\'fametar}{\f1  "set" ("went down in the West") }{\i\f1 
(MC:221; this is "Qenya")}{\b\f1 
\par \tab N\'famevalion}{\f1  *"of the West-powers" (SD:290); cf. }{\b\f1 Valion}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'fan}{\f1  "down below, underneath" (adv.)}{\i\f1  (N\'db)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab N\'fanatani}{\f1  "Western Men" = Sindarin }{\i\f1 D\'fanedain (WJ:386)}{\f1 . Sg. #}{\b\f1 N\'fanatan}{\f1  "D\'fanadan".}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Nunduin\'eb}{\f1  *"West-flow", name of a river in N\'famenor }{\i\f1 (UT:168)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nuntix\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("ks")}{\f1  dot or point placed below the line of writing}{\i\f1  (TIK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nuquerna}{\f1  "reversed", or perhaps rather *"turned upside down". In the phrases }{\b\f1 silm\'eb nuquerna}{\f1  and }{\b\f1 \'e1r\'eb nuquerna}{\f1 , q.v.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Nur-menel}{\f1  the lesser firmament, a great dome covering Valinor, made by Varda and full of star-imagines (see }{\b\f1 tinw\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 nill\'eb}{\f1 ). It was a simulacrum of }{\b\f1 Tar-menel}{\f1 , the true firmament }{\i\f1 
(MR:388)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'fara}{\f1  "deep"}{\i\f1  (N\'db)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'faro}{\f1  "sunset"}{\i\f1  (ND\'db)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Nurquendi}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "Gnomes" (lit. *"Deep Elves"), sg. *}{\b\f1 Nurquend\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (N\'db)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nurru}{\f1 - "murmur, grumble" (cf. "Qenya" }{\b\f1 n\'faru}{\f1 -); participle }{\b\f1 nurrula}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 , changed to }{\b\f1 nurrua}{\f1 
, perhaps a kind of verbal adjective of the same meaning (translated "mumbling" in MC:215)
\par \tab #}{\b\f1 nurta}{\f1 - "hide", verbal stem isolated from }{\b\f1 nurtal\'eb}{\f1  "hiding", q.v.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nurtal\'eb}{\f1  "hiding" (evidently a verbal stem #}{\b\f1 nurta}{\f1 - "hide" with the verbal noun ending -}{\b\f1 l\'eb}{\f1 ); }{\b\f1 Nurtal\'eb Valin\'f3reva}{\f1  "the Hiding of Valinor" }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nuru}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Nuru}{\f1  "death, Death" }{\i\f1 (\'d1GUR). }{\f1 This would represent earlier *}{\b\f1 \'f1uru}{\f1  and should be spelt accordingly in Tengwar writing. When personalized, }{\b\f1 Nuru}{\f1  refers to Mandos. Cf. }{
\b\f1 Nurufantur}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'faru}{\f1 - "growl (of dogs), grumble" }{\i\f1 (LT1:263)}{\f1 . Perhaps replaced by }{\b\f1 nurru}{\f1 - (q.v.) in Tolkien's later Quenya.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Nurufantur}{\f1  "lord of Death-cloud", surname of Mandos }{\i\f1 (SPAN, \'d1GUR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nuruhuin\'eb}{\f1  "death-shadow" }{\i\f1 (LR:47, 56, SD:310)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nut}{\f1 - "tie" (1st pers. aorist }{\b\f1 nutin}{\f1  "I tie") }{\i\f1 (NUT)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'fata}{\f1 - "set, sink" (of Sun or Moon) }{\i\f1 (ND\'db)}{\f1 . In early "Qenya", the word was glossed "stoop, sink" }{\i\f1 (LT1:263)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab n\'fat\'eb}{\f1  "bond, knot" }{\i\f1 (NUT)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nwalca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "cruel"}{\i\f1  (\'d1GWAL; this must represent earlier *}{\b\i\f1 \'f1walca}{\i\f1  = *}{\b\i\f1 ngwalca}{\i\f1 ; these forms are not given in Etym, but compare }{\b\i\f1 nwalm\'eb}{\i\f1 
 below. In Tengwar writing, the initial NW would be represented by the letter }{\f1 nwalm\'eb}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nwalm\'eb}{\f1  "torment", also name of tengwa 20. Originally pronounced }{\b\f1 ngwalm\'eb}{\f1 ; initial }{\b\f1 ng}{\f1  had become }{\b\f1 n}{\f1  in Third Age pronunciation }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nwalya}{\f1 - "to pain, torment" }{\i\f1 (\'d1GWAL; this must represent earlier *}{\b\i\f1 \'f1walya}{\i\f1  = *}{\b\i\f1 ngwalya}{\i\f1 ; these forms are not given in Etym, but compare }{\b\i\f1 nwalm\'eb}{\i\f1 
 above. In Tengwar writing, the initial NW would be represented by the letter }{\f1 nwalm\'eb}{\i\f1 .)
\par }{\f1 \tab -}{\b\f1 nya}{\f1  pronominal suffix, 1st person sg. possessive, "my", e.g. }{\b\f1 tatanya}{\f1  "my father" }{\i\f1 (UT:191)}{\f1 . This ending seems to prefer }{\b\f1 i}{\f1  as its connecting vowel where one is needed, cf. }{\b\f1 Anarinya}
{\f1  "my sun" in LR:72, so also in }{\b\f1 hildinyar}{\f1  "my heirs". It was previously theorized that a final -}{\b\f1 \'eb}{\f1  would also be changed to -}{\b\f1 i}{\f1 - before -}{\b\f1 nya}{\f1 , but the example }{\b\f1 \'f3renya}{\f1  "my heart [}
{\b\f1 \'f3r\'eb}{\f1 ]" indicates that this is not the case }{\i\f1 (VT41:11)}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nyano}{\f1  "rat" }{\i\f1 (probably misreading for *}{\b\i\f1 nyarro}{\i\f1 , given the primitive form *}{\f1 nyadr\'f4}{\i\f1 )}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (NYAD)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nyar}{\f1 - "to tell" (1st pers. aorist }{\b\f1 nyarin}{\f1  "I tell") }{\i\f1 (NAR}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nyarna}{\f1  "tale, saga" }{\i\f1 (NAR}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\f1 \tab *}{\b\f1 nyarro}{\f1  - see }{\i\f1 nyano}{\f1 
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 ny\'eb}{\f1  pronominal suffix "I"; also short form -}{\b\f1 n}{\f1 . In }{\b\f1 ut\'favienyes}{\f1  (see }{\b\f1 tuv}{\f1 -)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nyell\'eb}{\f1  "bell" }{\i\f1 (NYEL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nyello}{\f1  "singer" }{\i\f1 (NYEL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ny\'e9na}{\f1 - "lament" }{\i\f1 (LT1:262)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ny\'e9ni}{\f1  "she-goat" }{\i\f1 (LT1:262)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Nyenna}{\f1  alternative form of }{\b\f1 Nienna}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (LT1:262)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab nyeny\'eb}{\f1  "weeping" }{\i\f1 (LT1:262)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \qj\fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab ny\'e9r\'eb}{\f1  "grief" }{\i\f1 (LT1:261)}{\f1 , "sorrow" }{\i\f1 (GL:60)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \qj\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 
\par <O>
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab \'86}{\b\f1 \'d3}{\f1  "the sea" (poetic word, hardly valid in Tolkien's later Quenya) }{\i\f1 (LT1:263, there spelt }{\b\i\f1 \'d4}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab o}{\f1  (1) a word for "and" occurring solely in SD:246; all other sources give }{\b\f1 ar}{\f1 .
\par \tab }{\b\f1 o}{\f1  (2) "with" }{\i\f1 (MC:216; this is "Qenya"; WJ:367 states that no independent preposition }{\b\i\f1 o}{\i\f1  was used in Quenya. Use }{\b\i\f1 yo}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1 
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 o}{\f1  (1) genitive ending, in }{\b\f1 Orom\'ebo}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Elenna-n\'f3r\'ebo}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Rithil-Anamo}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 R\'familo}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Lestan\'f3r\'ebo}{\f1 , q.v. Pl. -}{\b\f1 ion}{\f1  and -}{\b\f1 ron}{\f1 , q.v.
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 o}{\f1  (2), also -}{\b\f1 \'f3}{\f1  "a person, somebody", pronominal suffix }{\i\f1 (PM:340)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'f3}{\f1 - (usually reduced to }{\b\f1 o}{\f1 - when unstressed) a prefix "used in words describing the meeting, junction, or union of two things or persons, or of two groups thought of as units". In }{\b\f1 omenti\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 \'f3
noni}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 \'f3nona}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ:367; in the }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1 , stem W\'d4, the prefix }{\b\i\f1 o}{\i\f1 -, }{\b\i\f1 \'f3}{\i\f1 - is simply defined as "together")
\par }{\b\f1 \tab oa}{\f1  (1), also }{\b\f1 oar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("\'f6a, \'f6ar")}{\f1 , adverbs, "away"}{\i\f1  (WJ:366, gloss in VT39:6)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab oa}{\f1  (2) "wool" }{\i\f1 (LT1:249; evidently replaced by }{\b\i\f1 t\'f3}{\i\f1  in Tolkien's later Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab oant\'eb }{\f1 "went away (to another place)"; past tense of }{\b\f1 auta}{\f1 -. Also perfect }{\b\f1 oanti\'eb}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (WJ:366)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab oar }{\f1 (1) = }{\b\f1 oa}{\f1 , q.v. 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab oar}{\f1  (2) "child of the sea, merchild" }{\i\f1 (LT1:263; hardly valid in Tolkien's later Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Oarel}{\i\f1  ("O\'e4rel")}{\f1  "Elf who departed from Beleriand to Aman" (while the }{\i\f1 Sindar }{\f1 stayed there). Stem }{\b\f1 Oareld}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 Oareldi}{\i\f1  (WJ:363, 374)}{\f1 . Older form }{\b\f1 Oazeldi}{\f1 .

\par }{\b\f1 \tab oaris}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 oarits}{\f1 -), also }{\b\f1 oarwen}{\f1 , "mermaid" }{\i\f1 (LT1:263; read perhaps }{\b\i\f1 \'ebar}{\i\f1 - for }{\b\i\f1 oar}{\i\f1 - in LotR-style Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Oazeldi}{\f1  Vanyarin (and original) form of }{\b\f1 Oareldi}{\f1 ; see }{\b\f1 Oarel}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ:374)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 ohlon}{\f1  (pl. }{\b\f1 ohloni}{\f1  is attested) "diphthong", used of both vocalic diphthongs and "consonantal diphthongs" like }{\i\f1 mb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (VT39:9)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab ohta}{\f1  "war" }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (OKTA, KOT > KOTH)
\par }{\f1 \tab #}{\b\f1 ohtacar}{\f1 - stem of the past tense }{\b\f1 ohtac\'e1r\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (-"k\'e1re")}{\f1  "war-made", made war (+ allative = make war upon) (LR:47, SD:246; }{\b\f1 ohtac\'e1ri\'eb}{\f1  in LR:56). The past tense is probably *}{
\b\f1 ohtacarn\'eb}{\f1  in LotR-style Quenya. 
\par \tab [}{\b\f1 ohtacaro}{\f1 ] }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "warrior"}{\i\f1  (KAR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ohtar}{\f1  "warrior, soldier" }{\i\f1 (UT:282)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab oi}{\f1  "ever" }{\i\f1 (OY)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab oia}{\f1  "everlasting" }{\i\f1 (OY)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Oiac\'fami}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  = }{\i\f1 Avac\'fama ("k")}{\f1 , the Exterior Void beyond the World }{\i\f1 (OY, cf. AWA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab oial\'eb}{\f1  "everlasting [?age]" }{\i\f1 (Reading of gloss uncertain)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (OY) }{\f1 Used as an adverb "everlastingly" in }{\i\f1 Nam\'e1ri\'eb (Nam, RGEO:67)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab o\'efcta}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 ??? }{\i\f1 (twice in }{\f1 Narqelion}{\i\f1 ; the combination }{\b\i\f1 ct}{\i\f1  would have to become }{\b\i\f1 ht}{\i\f1  in LotR-style Quenya, and the hiatic combination}{\b\i\f1  o\'ef}{\i\f1 
 does not occur.)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab oiencarm\'eb Eruo}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "the One's [Eru's] perpetual production", free rendering "God's management of the Drama" }{\i\f1 (MR:471)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab oilima }{\f1 "last" }{\i\f1 (MC:213, 214; this is "Qenya")}{\f1 , inflected or lengthened form }{\b\f1 oilimain}{\f1  "last (pl.)" }{\i\f1 (MC:221)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 oilimaisen}{\f1  "}{\i\f1 (MC:221)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 oilimaite}{\f1  "last" }{
\i\f1 (MC:214, 221) }{\b\f1 
\par \tab oio}{\f1  "an endless period" }{\i\f1 (CO)}{\f1  or "ever" }{\i\f1 (SA:los)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Oiolair\'eb}{\f1  "Ever-summer" (name of a tree, UT:167; also in the name }{\b\f1 Coron Oiolair\'eb}{\f1 , "Mound of Ever-summer", assimilated }{\b\f1 corol}{
\f1 - in the contraction }{\b\f1 Corollair\'eb}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (SA:coron)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Oioloss\'eb}{\f1  "Everwhite, Ever-snowwhite", a name of Taniquetil }{\i\f1 (OY)}{\f1 , hence the translation "Mount Everwhite" in Tolkien's rendering of }{\i\f1 Nam
\'e1ri\'eb}{\f1 . See also }{\i\f1 SA:los}{\f1 . Explicit "mount" in }{\b\f1 Oron Oioloss\'eb}{\f1  "Mount Everwhite" }{\i\f1 (WJ:403)}{\f1 . Ablativic genitive }{\b\f1 Oioloss\'ebo}{\f1  "from Mount Everwhite" in }{\i\f1 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\f1  (}{\i\f1 
Nam, RGEO:67, OY)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Oiom\'far\'eb}{\f1  place-name; *"Ever-?mist" }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab oira}{\f1  "eternal" }{\i\f1 (OY)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab oir\'eb}{\f1  "everlasting [?age]" }{\i\f1 (Reading of gloss uncertain)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (OY)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'f3la}{\f1 - "to dream" (said to be "impersonal", probably meaning that the dreamer is mentioned in the dative rather than the nominative) }{\i\f1 (UT:396)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab olassi\'eb}{\f1  "collection of leaves, foliage" }{\i\f1 (Letters:283)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab olba}{\f1  "branch" }{\i\f1 (PM:340; the form *}{\b\i\f1 olva}{\i\f1  may be more frequent; }{\b\i\f1 olba}{\i\f1  can only occur in the Quenya variant that uses }{\b\i\f1 lb}{\i\f1  for }{\b\i\f1 lv}{\i\f1 . The }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1 
, stem G\'d3LOB, has }{\b\i\f1 olwa}{\i\f1 . See also }{\b\i\f1 olvar}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ol\'eb}{\f1  "three" }{\i\f1 (LT1:258; in LotR-style Quenya }{\b\i\f1 neld\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'f3lem\'eb}{\f1  "elbow" }{\i\f1 (LT1:258)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ollo}{\f1  "cliff, seaward precipice" (also }{\i\f1 old\'f4}{\f1  - is this to be understood as the older form?) }{\i\f1 (LT1:252)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab olma}{\f1  "nine" }{\i\f1 (LT1:258; in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 nert\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Olofantur}{\f1  "lord of Dream-cloud", surname of the Vala L\'f3rien}{\i\f1  (\'d3LOS, SPAN)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b oloir\'eb}{ "great flood"
\par }{\b oloiya}{ "to inundate, flood"}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab olor}{\f1  "dream", noun}{\i\f1  (LOS, \'d3LOS, LT1:259 [the latter source also gives }{\b\i\f1 ol\'f3r\'eb}{\i\f1 ])}{\f1 ; perhaps changed by Tolkien to }{\b\f1 olos}{\f1 , q.v. 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ol\'f3r\'eba}{\f1  "dreamy" }{\i\f1 (LT1:259 - replaced by }{\b\i\f1 olosta}{\i\f1 , UT:396?) }{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ol\'f3rin}{\f1  name of the Maia that became Gandalf, connected to }{\b\f1 olos}{\f1  no. 1 }{\i\f1 (UT:396)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab olos}{\f1  (1) "dream, vision" (}{\b\f1 olor}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 olori}{\f1  from earlier }{\b\f1 olozi}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (UT:396). }{\f1 Cf. }{\b\f1 olor}{\f1 .
\par \tab \'86}{\b\f1 olos}{\f1  "(2) snow, fallen snow" (prob. }{\b\f1 oloss}{\f1 -, cf. the longer form }{\b\f1 oloss\'eb}{\f1  below; this form should be preferred since }{\b\f1 olos}{\f1  also = "dream, vision") }{\i\f1 (GOLOS)
\par }{\f1 \tab \'86}{\b\f1 oloss\'eb}{\f1  "snow, fallen snow" }{\i\f1 (GOL\'d3S, LOT[H])}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b ol\'f3t\'eb}{ "bloom, the flowers collectively of a single plant" }{\i (VT42:18)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab olosta}{\f1  "dreamy" }{\i\f1 (UT:396)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab olvar}{\f1  (sg. *}{\b\f1 olva}{\f1 ) "growing things with roots in the earth, *plants" }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 . More or less the same word as }{\b\f1 olwa}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 olba}{\f1 ?
\par }{\b\f1 \tab olwa}{\f1  "branch"}{\i\f1  (G\'d3LOB)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Olw\'eb}{\f1  masc. name }{\i\f1 (PM:340)}{\f1 , difficult to interpret }{\i\f1 (PM:341)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab olwen}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 olwenn}{\f1 -) "branch, wand, stick" }{\i\f1 (LT2:342)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'f3ma}{\f1  "voice" }{\i\f1 (OM)}{\f1 , "voice, resonance of the vocal chords" }{\i\f1 (VT39:16)}{\f1 ; *}{\b\f1 \'f3marya}{\f1  "his/her voice"; genitive }{\b\f1 \'f3maryo}{\f1  "of his/her voice" }{\i\f1 (Nam, RGEO:67)}{\f1 
. Instrumental pl. }{\b\f1 \'f3mainen}{\f1  "with voices" }{\i\f1 (WJ:391). }{\f1 The term }{\b\f1 \'f3ma}{\f1  is closely associated with }{\i\f1 vowels}{\f1 , see }{\b\f1 \'f3ma-tengw\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 \'f3m\'eba}{\f1 ; cf. also the compounds }{\b\f1 
\'f3mataina}{\f1  "vocalic extension", the addition to the base a final vowel identical to the stem-vowel }{\i\f1 (WJ:371, 417; also }{\b\i\f1 \'f3mataima}{\i\f1 , }{\i VT42:24, 25}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 \'f3matehtar}{\f1  "vo
wel-signs", signs used for vowels (usually called simply }{\b\f1 tehtar}{\f1 , strictly including all kinds of diacritics) }{\i\f1 (WJ:396)
\par \tab }{\b\f1 \'f3malingwe}{\f1  ?"voice-???" (}{\i\f1 Narqelion}{\f1 ; in Tolkien's later Quenya, }{\b\f1 \'f3ma}{\f1  means "voice" or "vowel" and }{\b\f1 lingw\'eb}{\f1  means "fish", but at least the latter gloss can hardly be relevant here)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 #}{\b\f1 \'f3ma-tengw\'eb}{\f1  "vowel" (only pl.}{\b\f1  \'f3ma-tengwi}{\f1  attested); this refers to vowels considered as independent phonemes, according to F\'eb
anor's new insights on phonemics. Also #}{\b\f1 \'f3m\'eba}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (VT39:8; }{\b\i\f1 \'f3matengwi}{\i\f1  ["\'f1"] with no hyphen in VT39:16)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab \'f3man}{\f1  "vowel" (pl. }{\b\f1 amandi}{\f1  given, probably a misreading for *}{\b\f1 omandi}{\f1 ; the stem would seem to be *}{\b\f1 omand}{\f1 -). }{\i\f1 (OM)}{\f1  The terms }{\b\f1 \'f3
ma-tengw\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 \'f3m\'eba}{\f1  from a later source are probably to be preferred.
\par \tab }{\b\f1 \'f3mataina}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 \'f3mataima}{\f1  \endash  see }{\b\f1 \'f3ma}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab omenti\'eb}{\f1  "meeting" (meeting or junction of the directions of two people) }{\i\f1 (WJ:367)}{\f1 , *}{\b\f1 omentielva}{\f1  "our meeting", only attested in the genitive: }{\b\f1 omentielvo}{\f1  "of our meeting". See -}{\b\f1 lv}{\f1 
-. Concerning the alternative reading }{\b\f1 omentielmo}{\f1 , see -}{\b\f1 lma}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 #}{\b\f1 \'f3m\'eba}{\f1  "vowel" (only pl.}{\b\f1  \'f3m\'ebar}{\f1  attested); this refers to vowels considered as independent phonemes, according to F\'ebanor's new insights on phonemics. Also #}{
\b\f1 \'f3ma-tengw\'eb}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (VT39:8)}{\b\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab -}{\b\f1 on}{\f1  gen.pl. ending }{\i\f1 (3O)}{\f1 , in }{\b\f1 Silmarillion}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Valion}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 aldaron}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 aranion}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tasarion}{\f1  (see }{\b\f1 Nan-Tasarion}{
\f1 ), }{\b\f1 N\'famevalion}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Sindaron}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Istarion}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Ingweron}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Quendion}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Eldaron}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab on}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ondo}{\f1  "stone" }{\i\f1 (LT2:342, LT1:254 - probably only }{\b\i\f1 ondo}{\i\f1  in LotR-style Quenya, see below).}{\f1  Various "Qenya" forms: }{\b\f1 ondoli }{\f1 "rocks" }{\i\f1 
(MC:213; this would be a partitive plural in LotR-style Quenya)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ondolin }{\f1 "rocks" }{\i\f1 (MC:220)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ondoisen}{\f1  "upon rocks" }{\i\f1 (MC:221)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ondolissen}{\f1  "rocks-on" }{\i\f1 
(MC:214; the latter form, partitive plural locative, is still valid in LotR-style Quenya)}{\b\f1 
\par \tab ondo}{\f1  "stone" as a material }{\i\f1 (UT:459, GOND)}{\f1 . Pl. }{\b\f1 ondor }{\f1 in an earlier variant of }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 ; partitive pl. locative }{\b\f1 ondoliss\'eb}{\f1  "on rocks" in the final version; }{\b\f1 Ondoher}{\f1 
 masc.name, *"Stone-lord" (}{\b\f1 ondo}{\f1  alluding to }{\i\f1 Gondor}{\f1 , "stone-land") }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 Ondolind\'eb}{\f1  "Gondolin" }{\i\f1 (SA:gond)}{\f1 ; see }{\b\f1 Ondo}{\f1 . Earlier "Qenya" has }{\b\f1 Ondolinda}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (changed from }{\f1 Ondolin}{\i\f1 )}{\f1  "singing stone, Gondolin" }{\i\f1 (LT1:254)}{\f1  
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b Ondon\'f3r\'eb}{ "Gondor" (Stone-land) }{\i (VT42:17)}{ }{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab \'f3n\'eb}{\f1  one pa.t. of }{\b\f1 onta}{\f1 - "beget, create" (the pa.t. may also be }{\b\f1 ontan\'eb}{\f1 )}{\i\f1  (ONO)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab onna}{\f1  "creature" }{\i\f1 (ONO)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab on\'f3na}{\f1  (1) adj. "twin-born"; (2) noun "one of a pair of twins"; pl. }{\b\f1 on\'f3ni}{\f1  "twins" }{\i\f1 (WJ:367)
\par \tab }{\b\f1 on\'f3n\'eb}{\f1  see }{\b\f1 on\'f3r\'eb
\par \tab on\'f3r\'eb}{\f1  "sister" (of blood-kin) (}{\i\f1 THEL/THELES, N\'d4}{\f1 ; both of these entries in the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1  as reproduced in LR have the reading "on\'f3ne", but the "Old Noldorin" cognate }{\i\f1 wan\'fare}{\f1 
 listed in the entry }{\i\f1 THEL}{\f1 /}{\i\f1 THELES}{\f1  seems to indicate that the Quenya word should be }{\i\f1 on\'f3r\'eb}{\f1 ; the letters }{\i\f1 n}{\f1  and }{\i\f1 r}{\f1 
 are easily confused in Tolkien's handwriting. There is no clear evidence for a feminine ending -}{\i\f1 n\'eb}{\f1  in Quenya, while -}{\i\f1 r\'eb}{\f1  is relatively well attested; cf. for instance }{\b\f1 ontar\'eb}{\f1 .)}{\b\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab on\'f3ro}{\f1  "brother" (of blood-kinship) }{\i\f1 (TOR, N\'d4 (W\'d4) )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab onot}{\f1 - "count up" }{\i\f1 (NOT)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab onta}{\f1 - (pa.t. }{\b\f1 \'f3n\'eb}{\f1  or }{\b\f1 ontan\'eb}{\f1 ) "beget, create" }{\i\f1 (ONO)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ontani}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (misreading for }{\b\i\f1 ontari}{\i\f1 , SD}{\i :73}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 , pl. of }{\b\i\f1 ontaro}{\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 ontar\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (ONO)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ontar\'eb}{\f1  "begetter, parent" (fem); pl. }{\b\f1 ontari}{\f1  (see }{\b\f1 ontani}{\f1 ) covers both sexes. }{\i\f1 (ONO)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ontaro}{\f1  "begetter, parent" (evidently masc.); pl. }{\b\f1 ontari}{\f1  (see }{\b\f1 ontani}{\f1 ) covers both sexes. }{\i\f1 (ONO)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab onya}{\f1  *"my child", *"my son" (not the normal word for "son", however - it seems to be derived from the stem }{\i\f1 ONO}{\f1  "beget") }{\i\f1 (UT:174)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab opel\'eb}{\f1  "walled house or village, 'town' " }{\i\f1 (PEL(ES) )
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 or}{\f1  "over" }{\i\f1 (CO)}{\f1 ; in early "Qenya", this preposition was also defined as "on, upon" }{\i\f1 (LT1:256, MC:216)}{\f1 
\par #}{\b\f1 or}{\f1 - "urge, impel, move", only of "mental" impulse. Constructed as an impersonal verb: }{\b\f1 or\'eb nin caritas}{\f1  "I would like/feel moved to do so" }{\i\f1 (VT41:13)}{\f1 , literally *"it impels for me
 to do so" (notice that what is the subject in English appears in the dative in Quenya). Elsewhere this verb is presented as an A-stem }{\b\f1 ora}{\f1 - instead (so that the aorist would be }{\b\f1 ora}{\f1  instead of }{\b\f1 or\'eb}{\f1 , cf. }{\b\f1 
ora nin}{\f1  "it warns me" in VT41:15), with past tense }{\b\f1 oran\'eb}{\f1  or }{\b\f1 orn\'eb}{\f1 , future tense }{\b\f1 oruv}{\f1 [}{\b\f1 a}{\f1 ], present tense }{\b\f1 \'f3r\'eba}{\f1  and a form }{\b\f1 ori\'eb}{\f1 
 that may be the gerund; the forms }{\b\f1 or\'f3ri\'eb}{\f1  and }{\b\f1 oh\'f3ri\'eb}{\f1  were rejected but may have been intended as perfect forms }{\i\f1 (VT41:13, 18)}{\f1 .
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 orco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "Orc", pl. }{\b\f1 orcor }{\f1 or }{\b\f1 orqui}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ:390, \'d3ROK; pl. }{\b\i\f1 Orcor}{\i\f1  also in MR:74)}{\f1 . Early "Qenya" has }{\b\f1 orc}{
\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 orqu}{\f1 -) }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "monster, demon" }{\i\f1 (LT1:264; in LotR-style Quenya, no word can end in -}{\b\i\f1 rc}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'f3r\'eb}{\f1  (1) "heart" (inner mind), also name of tengwa 21 }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 , "premonition" }{\i\f1 (VT41:13)}{\f1 , "nearest equivalent of 'heart' in our application to feelings, or emotions (courage, fear, hope, pity, etc.)" 
}{\i\f1 (VT41:13)}{\f1 . The }{\b\f1 \'f3r\'eb}{\f1  apparently defines a person's personality, cf. the description of Galadriel in PM:337, that "there dwelt in her the noble and generous spirit (}{\i\f1 \'f3r\'eb}{\f1 ) of the Vanyar". }{\b\f1 \'d3renya}
{\f1  "my heart" }{\i\f1 (VT41:11)}{\f1 .}{\b\f1 
\par \tab \'f3r\'eb}{\f1  (2) "rising" }{\i\f1 (ORO)}{\f1 , cf. early "Qenya" }{\b\f1 \'f3r\'eb}{\f1  "the dawn, Sunrise, East" }{\i\f1 (LT1:264)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'f3r\'eba}{\f1  "of the dawn, Eastern" }{\i\f1 (LT1:264)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'f3ress\'eb}{\f1  "in morning" }{\i\f1 (MC:214)}{\f1 , evidently the locative of }{\b\f1 \'f3r\'eb}{\f1  # 2 above.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab orma}{\f1  "physical matter" }{\i\f1 (MR:218, 231, 471)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ormal}{\f1  One of the Lamps of the Valar: *"High-Gold"??? }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab orm\'eb}{\f1  (1) "haste, violence, wrath", "rushing" }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (GOR, KHOR)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 orm\'eb}{\f1  (2) "summit, crest" }{\i\f1 (LT1:256; this "Qenya" word is probably obsoleted by # 1 above)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab orna}{\f1  "hasty" }{\i\f1 (GOR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab orn\'eb}{\f1  "tree" }{\i\f1 (Letters:308, SD:302: "when smaller and more slender like a birch or rowan", Etym stem \'d3R-NI: "tree, high isolated tree"). }{\f1 For the etymology, see Letters:426. In }{\b\f1 ornemalin}{\f1 
 "tree-yellow"; see }{\b\f1 laurelind\'f3renan lindelorendor}{\f1 ... }{\i\f1 (LotR2:III ch. 4; cf. Letters:308)}{\f1 . Masc. name }{\b\f1 Ornendil}{\f1  *"Tree-friend" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 oro}{\f1  "hill" }{\i\f1 (LT1:256; rather }{\b\i\f1 ambo}{\i\f1  in LotR-style Quenya) }{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 oro}{\f1 - "rise" }{\i\f1 (LT1:256; Tolkien's later Quenya has }{\b\i\f1 orta}{\i\f1 -)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Orocarni}{\f1  "the Red Mountains", place-name: lit. *"Mountain-Reds" }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab orofarn\'eb}{\f1  "mountain-dwelling"  }{\i\f1 (LotR2:III ch. 4, translated in Letters:224)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab oromandin }{\f1 "wood-spirits" }{\i\f1 (MC:215; this is "Qenya")}{\f1 
\par \tab *}{\b\f1 oromard\'eb}{\f1  "high-hall", pl }{\b\f1 oromardi}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Nam, RGEO:66)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Orom\'eb}{\f1  name of a Vala, adopted and adapted from Valarin. Observes Pengolodh, "the Eldar now take the name to singify 'horn-blowing' or 'horn-blower', but to the Valar it had no such meaning" }{\i\f1 (WJ:400-401, cf. SA:rom and ROM, T
\'c1WAR in Etym).}{\f1  Genitive }{\b\f1 Orom\'ebo}{\f1  and possessive }{\b\f1 Orom\'e9va}{\f1  in WJ:368.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Oromet}{\f1  place-name of obscure meaning }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab oron}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 oront}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 oronti}{\f1 ) "mountain" }{\i\f1 (\'d3ROT)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Oron Oioloss\'eb}{\f1  "Mount Everwhite" }{\i\f1 (WJ:403)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 oronta}{\f1  "steep" }{\i\f1 (LT1:256)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab oront\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 oronto}{\f1  "Sunrise" }{\i\f1 (LT1:264)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 orosta}{\f1  "ascension" }{\i\f1 (LT1:256)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab orqui}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  pl. of }{\b\i\f1 orco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") (\'d3ROK, LT2:336)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Orrostar}{\f1  the "Eastlands" of N\'famenor }{\i\f1 (UT:165)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab orta}{\f1 - "rise, raise, lift up", pa.t. }{\b\f1 ortan\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Nam, RGEO:67, ORO; misreading "ortani" in Letters:426)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab orto}{\f1  "mountain-top" }{\i\f1 (\'d3ROT)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 orto}{\f1 - "raise" }{\i\f1 (LT1:256; in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 orta}{\i\f1 -)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab os}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 ost}{\f1 -) "house, cottage" }{\i\f1 (LT2:336; hardly valid in LotR-style Quenya - use }{\b\i\f1 coa}{\i\f1  or }{\b\i\f1 mar}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \'f3sanw\'eb}{\f1  "interchange of thought", "communication of thought", telepathy }{\i\f1 (VT39:23, cf. MR:415)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 \'d3sanw\'eb-centa}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1 
 "Enquiry into the Communication of Thought" }{\i\f1 (VT39:23 cf. MR:415)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 osell\'eb}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "sister, [female] associate" }{\i\f1 (THEL/THELES, W\'d4)}{\f1 . Cf. }{\b\f1 otorno}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab ossa}{\f1  "wall and moat" }{\i\f1 (LT2:336)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab oss\'eb}{\f1  "terror" }{\i\f1 (GOS/GOTH)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Oss\'eb}{\f1  name of a Maia, adopted and adapted from Valarin }{\i\f1 (WJ:400)}{\f1 , though connected with the common noun }{\b\f1 oss\'eb}{\f1  "terror" in Etym }{\i\f1 (GOS/GOTH)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 osta}{\f1  "homestead" }{\i\f1 (LT2:336)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 ostar}{\f1  "township" }{\i\f1 (LT2:336)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 ostim\'eb}{\f1  (pl. }{\b\f1 ostimi}{\f1 
 is attested) "blend", term for a kind of "strengthened" elements within a stem, where a single sound has been expanded into two different elements while maintaining a unitary effect and significance: such as }{\i\f1 s}{\f1 - being turned into }{\i\f1 st}
{\f1 -, or }{\i\f1 m}{\f1  being strengthened to }{\i\f1 mb}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (VT39:9)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab osto }{\f1 (1) "a strong or fortified building or place, strong place, fortress" }{\i\f1 (MR:350, 471; WJ:414)}{\f1 ; "city, town with wall round" }{\i\f1 (OS)}{\f1 . 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 osto}{\f1  (2) "the gates of the Sun" }{\i\f1 (LT1:264; this "Qenya" word was probably obsoleted by # 1 above)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ostoher}{\f1  masc. name, *"City-lord" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab otornass\'eb}{\f1  "brotherhood" }{\i\f1 (TOR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab otorno}{\f1  "brother, sworn brother, [male] associate" }{\i\f1 (TOR, W\'d4)}{\f1 . Cf. }{\b\f1 osell\'eb}{\f1 .
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b ots\'eba}{ "seventh" }{\i (VT42:25)}{. See }{\b otso}{.}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Otselen}{\f1  "Seven Stars" = Great Bear (constellation) }{\i\f1 (OT/OTOS/OTOK)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 otso}{\f1  "seven" }{\i\f1 (SA:s\'eer, OT/OTOS/OTOK)}{\f1 ; }{\b ots\'eba}{ ordinal "seventh" }{\i (VT42:25)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 otsola}{\f1  "week" (evidently referring to a week of seven days like our own, since }{\b\f1 otso}{\f1  = seven). }{\i\f1 (GL:62)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab [}{\b\f1 ovesta}{\f1 ] "contract, compact, treaty" }{\i\f1 (WED, W\'d4)}{\f1 
\par 
\par <P>
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 paca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "paved floor, court" }{\i\f1 (GL:63)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 pahta}{\f1  "closed, shut, private" }{\i\f1 (VT39:23, VT41:6)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab palan}{\f1 - "far, distant, wide, to a great extent" }{\i\f1 (PAL)}{\f1 ; "far and wide" in }{\b\f1 palant\'edr}{\f1  (pl. }{\b\f1 palant\'edri}{\f1 
) *"Far-seer", the magic far-seeing stones made by the Noldor in the First Age }{\i\f1 (SA:palan, PAL)}{\f1 . For etymology, see Letters:427. Also }{\b\f1 Palantir}{\f1  masc. name, "Far-sighted" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A, SA:palan, PAL, TIR)}{\f1 
; assimilated }{\b\f1 palar}{\f1 - in }{\b\f1 Palarran}{\f1  "Far-Wanderer", name of a ship (}{\b\f1 palan}{\f1  + }{\b\f1 ran}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (UT:179)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab palis}{\f1  "sward, lawn" }{\i\f1 (LT1:264)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab palla}{\f1  "wide, expansive" }{\i\f1 (PAL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab palm\'eb}{\f1  "surface" }{\i\f1 (PAL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab palpa}{\f1 - "to beat, batter" }{\i\f1 (PALAP)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab palu}{\f1 - "open wide, spread, expand, extend" }{\i\f1 (PAL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab pal\'far\'eb}{\f1  "surface, bosom, bosom of Earth" (= Old English }{\i\f1 folde}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (PAL)}{\f1 ; cf. }{\b\f1 Pal\'farien}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Pal\'farien}{\f1  surname of Yavanna }{\i\f1 (PAL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Palurin}{\f1  "the wide world" }{\i\f1 (LT1:264)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab palya}{\f1 - "open wide, spread, expand, extend" }{\i\f1 (PAL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab panda}{\f1  "enclosure" }{\i\f1 (PAD)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab pano}{\f1  "piece of shaped wood" }{\i\f1 (PAN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab panta}{\f1  "open" (adj.) }{\i\f1 (PAT)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab panta}{\f1 - "to unfurl, spread out, open"}{\i\f1  (PAT)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab panya}{\f1 - "fix, set" }{\i\f1 (PAN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab paptalasselinde\'ebn}{\f1  "like music of falling leaves" }{\i\f1 (MC:216; this is "Qenya")}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab parca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "dry" }{\i\f1 (P\'c1RAK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab parma}{\f1  "book", also name of tengwa 2 }{\i\f1 (PAR, Appendix E)}{\f1 . In early "Qenya", the gloss was "skin, bark, parchment, book, writings" }{\i\f1 (LT2:346)}{\f1 , but it seems that in LotR-style Quenya, }{\b\f1 parma}{\f1 
 only means "book".
\par }{\b\f1 \tab parmalamb\'eb}{\f1  "book-language" = Q[u]enya }{\i\f1 (PAR)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 parmat\'e9ma}{\f1  "}{\i\f1 p}{\f1 -series", labials, the second column of the Tengwar system }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 . 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab pasta}{\f1  "smooth" }{\i\f1 (PATH)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 #}{\b\f1 pataca}{\f1  "consonant" (only pl. }{\b\f1 patacar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ["k"]}{\f1  is attested) }{\i\f1 (VT39:8)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 p\'e1va}{\f1  "mouth" (including tongue, lips and teeth). Apparently changed by Tolkien to }{\b\f1 n\'e1va}{\f1 , q.v. }{\i\f1 (VT39:19)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 p\'e1vatengwi}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 p\'e1v\'ebar}{\f1  words Tolkien apperently changed to }{\b\f1 n\'e1vatengwi}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 n\'e1v\'ebar}{\f1  (q.v.) }{\i\f1 (VT39:19)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab p\'e9}{\f1  "lip", dual }{\b\f1 peu}{\f1  "the two lips, the mouth-opening" }{\i\f1 (VT39:9)}{\f1 . In an earlier source, the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 p\'e9}{\f1  was glossed "mouth" }{\i\f1 
(PEG)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab pel}{\f1 - "go round, revolve, return"}{\i\f1  (PEL)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 pelecco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "axe" }{\i\f1 (LT2:346)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 pelecta}{\f1 - "hew" }{\i\f1 (LT2:346; this "Qenya" word may be adapted to LotR-style Quenya as *}{\b\i\f1 pelehta}{\i\f1 -)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (LT2:346)
\par }{\f1 \tab *}{\b\f1 pelehta}{\f1 - see }{\b\f1 pelecta}{\f1 - 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Pelendur}{\f1  masc.name, *"Fence-servant"??? }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab peler}{\f1  "fenced field" (Old English }{\i\f1 t\'fan}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (PEL(ES) )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab pella}{\f1  "beyond", apparently a postposition rather than a preposition: }{\b\f1 And\'fan\'eb pella}{\f1  "beyond the West", }{\b\f1 elenillor pella}{\f1  "from beyond the stars" (}{\i\f1 Nam, RGEO:66, Markirya}{\f1 ) 
\par }{\b\f1 Pel\'f3ri}{\f1  "Fencing Heights", the mountains raised by the Valar to protect Aman }{\i\f1 (SA:pel, WJ:403)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab peltas}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 peltax}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 peltaxi}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ["ks"]}{\f1 ) "pivot" }{\i\f1 (PEL, TAK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab penda}{\f1  "sloping down, inclined" }{\i\f1 (PEN/P\'c9NED)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab pend\'eb}{\f1  "slope, downslope, declivity" }{\i\f1 (PEN/P\'c9NED)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 penga}{\f1 - "pout"}{\i\f1  (VT39:11)}{\f1 
\par #}{\b\f1 penna}{\f1  "vowel" (only pl. }{\b\f1 pennar}{\f1  is attested) }{\i\f1 (VT39:16)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 penquanta}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("pe\'f1"-)}{\f1  "full to the brim, with mouth full" }{\i\f1 (VT39:11)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 penya}{\f1  "lacking, inadequate"; pl. }{\b\f1 peny\'eb}{\f1  in }{\b\f1 peny\'eb tengwi}{\f1  "lacking signs", "inadequate signs
"; in early Elvish analysis of Quenya the term for vowels with no preceding consonant, held (in many cases incorrectly) to have lost such a consonant }{\i\f1 (VT39:6, 8)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Pereldar}{\f1  "Half-elven" (= Sindarin }{\i\f1 Peredhil}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (Letters:282)}{\f1 , in the Etymologies used of the Danas or Nandor }{\i\f1 (PER)}{\f1 . Sg. #}{\b\f1 Perelda}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab perina}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (apparently the past participle of }{\b\i\f1 perya}{\i\f1 -)}{\f1  *"divided in middle, halved" }{\i\f1 (PER)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab perya}{\f1  "divide in middle, halve" }{\i\f1 (PER)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 peu}{\f1  "the two lips, the mouth-opening" }{\i\f1 (VT39:9)}{\f1 ; the dual of }{\b\f1 p\'e9}{\f1 , q.v.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab pica}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "small spot, dot" }{\i\f1 (PIK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab p\'edca}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "lessen, dwindle, waning"; participle }{\b\f1 p\'edcala}{\f1  "waning" (with locative ending: }{\b\f1 p\'edcalass\'eb}{\f1 ) in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab p\'edc\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "upon" (???) }{\i\f1 (MC:214; this is "Qenya") }{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Picinaucor }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "Petty-dwarves" (sg. #}{\b\f1 Piconauco}{\f1 , cf. }{\b\f1 nauco}{\f1 ). Also }{\b\f1 Pitya-naucor}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ:389)}{\f1  
\par }{\b\f1 \tab pilin}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 pilind}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 pilindi}{\f1 ) "arrow" }{\i\f1 (P\'cdLIM)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 piliningev\'eb}{\f1  ??? }{\i\f1 (Narqelion)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab pinilya}{\f1  "small" }{\i\f1 (MC:220; this is "Qenya")}{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 pinqu\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  ??? }{\i\f1 (Narqelion)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 pior}{\f1  ??? }{\i\f1 (Narqelion)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab pirucend\'eba}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "whirling lightly"}{\i\f1  (MC:215; this is "Qenya")
\par }{\b\f1 \tab pirya}{\f1  "juice, syrup" }{\i\f1 (PIS)
\par \tab }{\f1 #}{\b\f1 pitya}{\f1  "little" in }{\b\f1 Pityafinw\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Pitya-naucor}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Pityafinw\'eb}{\f1  "Little Finw\'eb", masc. name; he was called }{\i\f1 Amrod}{\f1  in Sindarin. Short Quenya name }{\b\f1 Pityo}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (PM:353)
\par \tab }{\b\f1 Pitya-naucor}{\f1  "Petty-dwarves" (sg. #}{\b\f1 Pitya-nauco}{\f1 , cf. }{\b\f1 nauco}{\f1 ) Also }{\b\f1 Picinaucor}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ:389)}{\f1  
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Pityo}{\f1  see }{\b\f1 Pityafinw\'eb
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 piucca}{\f1  "berry" }{\i\f1 (GL:64)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab piuta}{\f1  "spit" }{\i\f1 (probably verb, perhaps also noun) (PIW)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 poa}{\f1  "beard" }{\i\f1 (GL:63)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab poica}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "clean, pure"}{\i\f1  (POY)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 pol}{\f1 - "can" = have physical power and ability, as in }{\b\f1 polin quet\'eb}{\f1  "I can speak (because mouth and tongue are free)". Cf. }{\b\f1 ista}{\f1 -, }{\b\f1 lerta}{\f1 - as verbs "can" with somewhat different shades of meaning. 
}{\i\f1 (VT41:6)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab polda}{\f1  "strong, burly" }{\i\f1 (POL/POLOD)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab poldor\'eb}{\f1  (not glossed, derived from }{\b\i\f1 polda}{\f1  "strong, burly")}{\i\f1  (POL/POLOD)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Pold\'f3r\'eba}{\f1  "Valiant"; as title of Tulkas replaced by }{\b\f1 Astaldo}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (POL/POLOD, MR:146, 149. In GL:64, }{\b\i\f1 pold\'f3r\'eba}{\i\f1  is glossed "mighty".)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab por\'eb}{\f1  "flour, meal" }{\i\f1 (POL/POLOD)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab punta}{\f1  "stopped consonant" (= a plosive) }{\i\f1 (PUT, see PUS) 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab p\'far\'eba}{\f1  "smeared, discoloured" (}{\i\f1 Markirya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab pusta}{\f1  "stop" (noun), in punctuation full stop}{\i\f1  (PUS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab pusta}{\f1 - "to stop, put a stop to"; also intr. "cease, stop" }{\i\f1 (PUS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab pustan\'eb}{\f1  "blowing" }{\i\f1 (MC:213; this is "Qenya") }{\b\f1 
\par \tab putta}{\f1  "stop" (in punctuation) }{\i\f1 (PUT; see PUS)}{\f1 
\par 
\par <Q> 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab qu\'e1co}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "crow" }{\i\f1 (WJ:395; }{\f1 Etym }{\i\f1 also has }{\b\i\f1 corco}{\i\f1 , q.v.)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab quain\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "wailing (pl.)" }{\i\f1 (MC:213; this is "Qenya")}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b quain\'eba}{ ordinal "tenth" }{\i (VT42:25; this version of Quenya apparently presupposes *}{\b\i quain\'eb}{\i  rather than }{\b\i cainen}{\i  as the word for "ten")}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab qualin}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "dead" }{\i\f1 (KWAL, LT1:264)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab qualm\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "agony, death" }{\i\f1 (KWAL, LT1:264)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab qualum\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "heaving" }{\i\f1 (MC:214; this is "Qenya") }{\b\f1 
\par \tab qu\'e1m\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "sickness" }{\i\f1 (KWAM)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab quanta}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "full" }{\i\f1 (KWAT, Narqelion, VT39:8)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 quanta sarm\'eb}{\f1  "full writing", writing with separate letters for vowels }{\i\f1 (VT39:8)}{\f1 ; #}{\b\f1 quanta tengw\'eb}{\f1 
 "full sign" (only pl. }{\b\f1 quant\'eb tengwi}{\f1  is attested), in early Elvish analysis of Quenya the term for a consonant + a vowel (then analyzed as a kind of unitary phoneme rather than two phonemes); hence a stem like }{\i\f1 mata}{\f1 
- "eat" was analyzed as two }{\i\f1 quant\'eb tengwi}{\f1 :}{\i\f1  ma}{\f1  + }{\i\f1 ta}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (VT39:5)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Quantari\'eb}{\f1  "Day of Completion, Oldyear's Day" }{\i\f1 (PM:127) }{\f1 (= the }{\b\f1 quantien}{\f1  of the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab quantien}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "last day of year" }{\i\f1 (YEN)}{\f1 . The word is assigned a different meaning in PM:}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 quantien}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "full year" = }{\b\f1 y\'e9n}{\f1 , a period of 144 solar years }{
\i\f1 (PM:126; pl. }{\b\i\f1 quanti\'e9ni}{\i\f1 , PM:127)}{\f1 . Since the latter meaning comes from drafts for the LotR Appendices that did not make it into the published LotR, it should perhaps be ignored.}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab qu\'e1r\'eb}{\f1  (also }{\b\f1 qu\'e1r}{\f1 ) "fist" }{\i\f1 (SA:celeb, KWAR; in the }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1 , Tolkien first wrote }{\b\i\f1 qu\'e1r}{\i\f1  pl. }{\b\i\f1 quari}{\i\f1 , and }{\b\i\f1 qu\'e1r}{\i\f1  is also found in PM:3
18. As usual, the Etym forms have }{\b\i\f1 q}{\i\f1  instead of }{\b\i\f1 qu}{\i\f1 .) }{\f1 
According to PM:318, the "chief use [of this word] was in reference to the tightly closed hand as in using an implement or a craft-tool rather than to the 'fist' as used in punching".}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab quat}{\f1 - "fill" }{\i\f1 (WJ:392)}{\f1 , future #}{\b\f1 quantuva}{\f1  "shall fill" (}{\b\f1 enquantuva}{\f1  "shall refill") (}{\i\f1 Nam, RGEO:67)}{\f1 
\par \tab #}{\b\f1 quel}{\f1 - "to fail", only attested in the future tense (}{\b\f1 queluva}{\f1  in FS)}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab quelet}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 quelets}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 queletsi}{\f1 ) "corpse" }{\i\f1 (KWEL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab queli\'eb}{\f1  "waning" in }{\b\f1 Narqueli\'eb}{\f1 , q.v. 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab quell\'eb}{\f1  "fading", in the calendar of Imladris a precisely defined period of 54 days, but also used without any exact definition, for the latter part of autumn and the beginning of winter }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab qu\'e9n}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 quen}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 queni}{\f1 ; as final element in compounds -}{\b\f1 quen}{\f1 ) "one, (some)body, person, individual, man or woman", pl. }{\b\f1 queni}{\f1 
 = "persons", "(some) people", "they" with the most general meaning (as in "they [= people in general] say that..."). Combined with noun and adjective stems in old compounds to denote habitual o
ccupations or functions, or to describe those having some notable (permanent) quality; examples include }{\b\f1 roquen}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ciryaquen}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 arquen}{\f1 , q.v. Also in }{\b\f1 aiquen}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ilquen}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
(WJ:361 cf. 360, 372)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab quend\'eb}{\f1  "Elf", the little-used sg. of }{\b\f1 Quendi}{\f1 , q.v. }{\i\f1 (KWEN(ED), WJ:361)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Quendeli\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  *"the People of the Elves" }{\i\f1 (KWEN(ED) )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Quendendil}{\f1  (also contracted }{\b\f1 Quendil}{\f1 ; pl. }{\b\f1 Quendili}{\f1  in WJ:410) "Elf-friend" }{\i\f1 (WJ:410)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Quenderin }{\f1 "Quendian, belonging to the Elves as a whole" (a learned word) }{\i\f1 (WJ:407)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Quendi}{\f1  "Elves" as a race (analogical sg. }{\b\f1 quend\'eb}{\f1 , not much used) }{\i\f1 (WJ:361;}{\f1  }{\i\f1 SA:quen-/quet-, WJ:372, KWEN(ED), spelt "qende, Qendi" in Etym). }{\f1 Gen. pl. }{\b\f1 Quendion}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (PM:395)}{
\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab quendi}{\f1  "Elvish woman", pl. }{\b\f1 quendir}{\f1  given }{\i\f1 (MR:229; changed from }{\b\i\f1 quend\'eb}{\i\f1  pl. }{\b\i\f1 quender}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 ; the sg. }{\b\f1 quendi}{\f1  must not be confused with the pl. }{\b\f1 Quendi}{\f1 
, see above.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab quendu}{\f1  *"Elvish man", pl. }{\b\f1 quendur}{\f1  given }{\i\f1 (MR:229; changed from }{\b\i\f1 quendo}{\i\f1  pl. }{\b\i\f1 quendor}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Quendya}{\f1  original form of the word }{\b\f1 Quenya}{\f1 , preserved in the Vanyarin dialect (}{\b\f1 Quenya}{\f1  is the Noldorin form) }{\i\f1 (WJ:361, 371)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 quent }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "word" }{\i\f1 (LT2:348; in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 quetta}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab quenta}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "tale" }{\i\f1 (KWET)}{\f1 , "narrative, story" }{\i\f1 (VT39:16)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Quenta Silmarillion}{\f1  "the Story/Tale of the Silmarils"
\par }{\b\f1 \tab quental\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "account, history" }{\i\f1 (KWET)}{\f1 , "narration, History" as abstract, but the word may also be used with a particular reference, as in }{\b\f1 quental\'eb Noldoron}{\f1  or }{\b\f1 quental\'eb
 Noldorinwa}{\f1  "the history of the Noldor", referring to the real events rather than an account of them: "that part of [universal] History which concerned the Noldor". }{\i\f1 (VT39:16; in this source t
he spelling really is "quentale" rather than "qentale")}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab quentaro}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "narrator" }{\i\f1 (KWET)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 quentasta}{\f1  *"historical account", "any particular arrangement (by some author) of a series of records or evidences into a given historical account" (not History as such, which is }{\b\f1 quental
\'eb}{\f1 ). }{\i\f1 (VT39:16)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 quentel\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "sentence" }{\i\f1 (LT2:348)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab quenya}{\f1  "speech" }{\i\f1 (PM:399)}{\f1 ; the language-name }{\b\f1 Quenya}{\f1  is said to mean properly "language, speech" }{\i\f1 (WJ:393)}{\f1 .}{\i\f1  }{\f1 However, }{\b\f1 Quenya}{\f1  (archaic }{\b\f1 Quendya}{\f1 
, still so in Vanyarin) is also interpreted "Elvish" }{\i\f1 (Letters:176)}{\f1 , sc. the adjective corresponding to }{\b\f1 Quendi}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ:374)}{\f1 , but it was no longer used as a general adjective. }{\b\f1 Quenya lamb\'eb}{\i\f1  }{\f1 
"Quenya tongue" }{\i\f1 (WJ:407).}{\f1 
\par \tab #}{\b\f1 querna}{\f1  probably "turned"; isolated from }{\b\f1 nuquerna}{\f1  (q.v.) *"under-turned" = reversed, turned upside down. This also suggests a verbal stem #}{\b\f1 quer}{\f1 - "turn".
\par }{\b\f1 \tab quess\'eb}{\f1  "feather", also name of tengwa 4 }{\i\f1 (Appendix E, WJ:417, KWES)}{\f1 \tab 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 quesset\'e9ma}{\f1  "}{\i\f1 qu}{\f1 -series", velarized series: fourth column of the Tengwar system }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab quesset}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "pillow"; probably *}{\b\f1 quessec}{\f1 - since the Sindarin cognate }{\i\f1 pesseg}{\f1  points to a primitive form *}{\i\f1 kwessek}{\f1 - (compare }{\b\f1 filit}{
\f1 , }{\b\f1 filic}{\f1 -) }{\i\f1 (KWES)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab quet}{\f1 - "say, speak" }{\i\f1 (SA:quen-/quet-, LT2:348)}{\f1 , aorist }{\b\f1 quet\'eb}{\f1  in VT41:11, present tense }{\b\f1 qu\'e9ta }{\f1 in VT41:13, pa.t. }{\b\f1 quent\'eb}{\f1  in PM:401, 404. Translated "tell" in the sentence }{
\b\f1 \'f3renya quet\'eb nin}{\f1  "my heart tells me"}{\i\f1  (VT41:15)}{\f1 . Cf. also #}{\b\f1 maquet}{\f1 -
\par }{\b\f1 \tab quetil}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "tongue, language" }{\i\f1 (KWET)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab quetta}{\f1  "word"}{\i\f1  (SA:quen-/quet-, GL:28)}{\f1 , pl. }{\b\f1 quettar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ:391)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 quild\'eb}{\f1  "hush, rest, quiet" }{\i\f1 (GL:23)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab qu\'edmari }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  pl. "phantoms" }{\i\f1 (MC:213; in LotR-style Quenya rather }{\b\i\f1 fairi}{\i\f1 , sg. }{\b\i\f1 fair\'eb}{\i\f1 )
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 quimell\'eb}{\f1  "lady" }{\i\f1 (GL:45)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab quinga}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "bow" (for shooting) }{\i\f1 (KWIG, LT1:256) }{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 quingi}{\b\i\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "twang, of strings, harp" }{\i\f1 (LT1:256; rather }{\b\i\f1 ting\'eb}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 tango}{\i\f1  in LotR-style Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab quorin}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "drowned, choked" }{\i\f1 (LT1:264)}{\f1  Some think this is not a valid form in LotR-style Quenya, since }{\b\f1 quo}{\f1 - may not be a possible combination in that later version of the language.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab quoro}{\f1 -}{\i\f1  ("q")}{\f1  "choke, suffocate" }{\i\f1 (LT1:264)}{\f1 . See }{\b\f1 quorin}{\f1 .
\par 
\par <R>
\par }{\i\f1 \tab }{\f1 -}{\b\f1 r}{\f1  nominative plural ending regularly used on nouns ending in -}{\b\f1 a}{\f1 , -}{\b\f1 i}{\f1 , -}{\b\f1 i\'eb}{\f1 , -}{\b\f1 o}{\f1 , -}{\b\f1 u}{\f1 , e.g. }{\b\f1 Ainur}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Valar}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tier}{\f1 .

\par }{\b\f1 \tab r\'e1}{\f1  (1) pl. }{\b\f1 r\'e1vi}{\f1  "lion" }{\i\f1 (RAW)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab r\'e1}{\f1  (2) "arm" }{\i\f1 (LT2:335, there spelt }{\b\i\f1 r\'e2}{\i\f1 ; certainly obsoleted by # 1 above. In Tolkien's later Quenya, "arm" is }{\b\i\f1 ranco}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab rac}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "break", past participle }{\b\f1 r\'e1cina}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("r\'e1kina")}{\f1  "broken" in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 #}{\b\f1 racina}{\f1  "stripped, deprived"; this adj. is only attested in the pl. (}{\b\f1 racin\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ["k"]}{\f1 ). Compare }{\b\f1 r\'e1cina}{\f1  under }{\b\f1 rac}{\f1 - above. Cf. #}{
\b\f1 racina tengw\'eb}{\f1  (only pl. }{\b\f1 racin\'eb tengwi}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  is attested) "stripped sign", "deprived sign"; in early Elvish
 analysis of Quenya the term for a consonant with no following vowel; the vowel was held to have disappeared or been omitted }{\i\f1 (VT39:6)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab r\'e1ca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "wolf"}{\i\f1  (DAR\'c1K)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab racta}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "stretch out, reach" }{\i\f1 (LT2:335; read *}{\b\i\f1 rahta}{\i\f1 - if the word is to be adapted to LotR-style Quenya)}{\f1 
\par \tab *}{\b\f1 rahta}{\f1 - see }{\b\f1 racta}{\f1 -
\par }{\b\f1 \tab raica}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "crooked, bent, wrong" }{\i\f1 (R\'c1YAK, VT39:7)}{\f1 , pl. }{\b\f1 raicar}{\f1  in LR:47 (read perhaps *}{\b\f1 raic\'eb}{\f1  in LotR-style Quenya)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b raima}{ "net" }{\i (VT42:12)}{
\par }{\b raim\'eb}{ "network, lace" }{\i (VT42:28)}{. In the }{\i Etymologies}{ as printed in LR, a word }{\b\f1 raim\'eb}{\f1  "hunt, hunting" is also cited in the entry }{\i\f1 ROY}{\i\f1\super 1}{\f1 
, but given the form of the root itself, this word should evidently read *}{\b\f1 roim\'eb}{\f1 .}{
\par }{\b raina}{, adj. "nettled, enlaced" }{\i (VT42:11)}{
\par }{\b raita}{- 1) "make network or lace" }{\i (also }{\b\i r\'eba}{\i -)}{, 2) "catch in a net" }{\i (VT42:12)}{
\par [}{\b raiwe}{ "lace" }{\i (VT42:12)}{]}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab r\'e1ma}{\f1  "wing", pl. }{\b\f1 r\'e1mar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (RAM, Nam, RGEO:66, LT2:335)}{\f1 ; }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1  has both nominative pl. }{\b\f1 r\'e1mar}{\f1  "wings" and instrumental pl. }{\b\f1 r
\'e1mainen}{\f1  *"with wings" (translated "on wings" by Tolkien); }{\b\f1 r\'e1mali}{\f1  "wings" in MC:213 would be a partitive pl. in LotR-style Quenya. Variant }{\b\f1 r\'e1m\'eb}{\f1  in the names }{\b\f1 E\'e4rr\'e1m\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Alquar\'e1m
\'eb}{\f1 , q.v.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab rama}{\f1 - "to shout" }{\i\f1 (LT1:259)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab r\'e1mal\'f3k\'eb}{\f1  "winged dragon" }{\i\f1 (LOK)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 r\'e1mavoit\'eb}{\f1  "having wings" }{\i\f1 (LT2:335, Narqelion}{\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ramba}{\f1  "wall" }{\i\f1 (RAM, SA)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 ramb\'eb}{\f1  "a shout" }{\i\f1 (LT1:259)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 ran}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 ram}{\f1 -) "noise" }{\i\f1 (LT1:259, QL:79)}{\b\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 R\'e1na}{\f1  "the Wayward, the Wanderer", a name of the moon }{\i\f1 (MR:198, MC:221, Silm)}{\f1 ; the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1  gives }{\b\f1 Rana}{\f1  with a short vowel }{\i\f1 (RAN)}{\f1 
. According to one late source, }{\b\f1 R\'e1na}{\f1  is not properly the Moon itself but is rather the}{ "name of the spirit (M\'e1ya) that was said to abide in the Moon as its guardian" }{\i (VT42:13)}{.}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab ranco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "arm", pl. }{\b\f1 ranqui}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (RAK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab randa}{\f1  "cycle, age" (100 Valian Years) }{\i\f1 (RAD)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab r\'e1n\'eb}{\f1  "straying, wandering" }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (RAN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab r\'e1nen}{\f1  "errant" }{\i\f1 (RAN; may be a misreading for *}{\b\i\f1 r\'e1n\'eba}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ranga}{\f1  (pl. }{\b\f1 rangar}{\f1  is attested) "yard, full pace". This N\'famen\'f3rean linar measure was "slightly longer than our yard, approximately 38 inches [= 96.5 cm]".}{\i\f1  (UT:285, 461)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab rangw\'eb}{\f1  "fathom" }{\i\f1 (RAK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ranqui}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  pl. of }{\b\i\f1 ranco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (RAK)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 ranya}{\f1 - (1) verb "to stray" }{\i\f1 (RAN)}{\f1 , (2) noun }{\b ranya}{ "erratic wandering" }{\i (VT42:13)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 R\'e1sa}{\f1  "the Sea" }{\i\f1 (LT2:347; rather }{\b\i\f1 \'ebar}{\i\f1  in Tolkien's later Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab rass\'eb}{\f1  "horn" (especially on living animal, but also applied to mountains) }{\i\f1 (RAS, PM:69)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 rato}{\f1  "soon" }{\i\f1 (Arct)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 rau}{\f1  (pl. }{\b\f1 r\'e1vi}{\f1 ) "lion" }{\i\f1 (LT1:260; the pl. is valid in Tolkien's later Quenya, but the sg. has become }{\b\i\f1 r\'e1}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab rauco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "a powerful, hostile, and terrible creature", "very terrible creature", especially in the compound }{\b\f1 Valarauco}{\f1  "Demon of Might" }{\i\f1 (WJ:415, VT39:10, cf. SA:raukor. In the }{\f1 Etymologies}{
\i\f1 , stem RUK, the gloss is "demon".)}{\f1  In the compound }{\b\f1 Valaraucar}{\f1  "Balrogs", the pl. of }{\b\f1 rauco}{\f1  is surprisingly #}{\b\f1 raucar}{\f1  instead of *}{\b\f1 raucor}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab raumo}{\f1  "(noise of a) storm" (}{\i\f1 Markirya)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 raust}{\f1  "hunting, preying" }{\i\f1 (LT1:260; in LotR-style Quenya *}{\b\i\f1 roim\'eb}{\i\f1  [misreading "raime" in LR:384]. No word can end in -}{\b\i\f1 st}{\i\f1  in LotR-style Quenya.)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab rauta}{\f1  "metal" [meaning changed by Tolkien from "copper"] }{\i\f1 (RAUT\'c2)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 rauta}{\f1 - "to hunt" }{\i\f1 (LT1:260; in Tolkien's later Quenya rather }{\b\i\f1 roita}{\i\f1 -)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab r\'e1va}{\f1  (1) "bank" (especially of a river) }{\i\f1 (RAMB\'c2)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab r\'e1va}{\f1  (2) "wild, untamed"}{\i\f1  (RAB)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab r\'e1v\'eb}{\f1  "roaring noise" }{\i\f1 (Markirya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab r\'e1v\'eba}{\f1  "roaring" (adj.) }{\i\f1 (Markirya)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 ravenn\'eb}{\f1  "she-lion" }{\i\f1 (LT1:260)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab r\'e9}{\i\f1  }{\f1 "day" (of the sun), a full 24-hour cycle }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)}{\f1 ; short -}{\b\f1 r\'eb}{\f1  in compounds like }{\b\f1 Ringar\'eb}{\f1  (q.v.)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b r\'eba}{- "make network; make lace" }{\i (VT42:12)}{\f1 
\par }{\b remba}{- "net, entrap" }{\i (VT42:12)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab remb\'eb}{\f1  "mesh" }{\i\f1 (Appendix E, in a footnote)}{\f1 , }{"hunter's or fisher's net" }{\i (VT42:29)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b rembina}{ "entangled" }{\i (VT42:12)}{\f1 
\par }{\b remma}{ "snare" (as noun) }{\i (VT42:12)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab rempa}{\f1  "crooked, hooked" }{\i\f1 (REP)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab r\'e9na}{\f1  "edge, border, margin" }{\i\f1 (REG)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab rend\'eb}{\f1  pa.t. of }{\b\i\f1 rerin}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (RED)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab }{\f1 #}{\b\f1 rer}{\f1 - "to sow" (1st pers. aorist }{\b\f1 rerin}{\f1  "I sow"), pa.t. }{\b\f1 rend\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (RED)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b r\'eda}{ "wreath" }{\i (PM:347)}{\i\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 #}{\b\f1 ric}{\f1 - "twist", perfect }{\b\f1 ir\'edci\'eb}{\f1  "has twisted" }{\i\f1 (VT39:9)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab ri\'eb}{\f1  "crown" }{\i\f1 (RIG)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab riel}{\f1  (*}{\b\f1 riell}{\f1 -) "garlanded maiden" }{\i\f1 (SA:kal-)}{\f1 , full form }{\b\f1 riell\'eb}{\f1  "a maiden crowned with a festival garland" }{\i\f1 (PM:347). }{\f1 In }{\b\f1 Altariel}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Altariell\'eb}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab rihta}{\f1 - "jerk, give quick twist or move, twitch" }{\i\f1 (RIK(H) )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab rilma}{\f1  "glittering light" }{\i\f1 (RIL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab rilya}{\f1  "glittering, brilliance"}{\i\f1  (RIL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab r\'edma}{\f1  "edge, hem, border" }{\i\f1 (R\'ce)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab rimba}{\f1  "frequent, numerous" }{\i\f1 (RIM)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab rimb\'eb}{\f1  "crowd, host, great number" }{\i\f1 (RIM, SA:rim, Letters:282)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab rimpa}{\f1  "rushing, flying" }{\i\f1 (RIP)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 rin}{\f1  "dew" }{\i\f1 (LT1:265; rather }{\b\i\f1 ross\'eb}{\i\f1  in LotR-style Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab r\'edna}{\f1  "crowned" }{\i\f1 (RIG)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab rinc\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "flourish, quick shake" }{\i\f1 (RIK(H) )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab rinda}{\f1  "circular" }{\i\f1 (RIN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab rind\'eb}{\f1  "circle" }{\i\f1 (RIN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ringa}{\f1  "cold" (}{\i\f1 Markirya)}{\f1 ; the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1  gives }{\b\f1 ring\'eb}{\f1  (}{\i\f1 RINGI}{\f1 ), but it seems that }{\b\f1 ringa}{\f1  is to be preferred (cf. }{\b\f1 Ringar\'eb}{\f1  below). In early "Qenya", }{
\b\f1 ringa}{\f1  is glossed "damp, cold, chilly" (LT1:265) 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ringar\'eb}{\f1  the twelfth and last month of the year, "December" }{\i\f1 (Appendix D, SA:ring)}{\f1 ; the word seems to mean *"Cold-day".
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ring\'eb}{\f1  1. (adj.) "cold", also }{\b\f1 ringa}{\f1  (which form is to be preferred; cf. }{\b\f1 Ringar\'eb}{\f1  in LotR); 2. (noun) "cold pool or lake (in mountains)" }{\i\f1 (RINGI)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ringil}{\f1  name of one of the great Lamps (pillared on ice), apparently contains }{\b\f1 ring\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (RINGI)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 ringw\'eb}{\f1  "rime, frost" }{\i\f1 (LT1:265)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab rista}{\f1 -, }{\b\f1 rista}{\f1  "cut" (vb and noun) }{\i\f1 (RIS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Rithil-Anamo}{\f1  "Ring of Doom", translation of the foreign word }{\b\f1 M\'e1hanaxar}{\f1  that was adopted and adapted from Valarin }{\i\f1 (WJ:401)}{\f1 . Presumably *}{\b\f1 Risil-Anamo}{\f1  in Exilic Quenya.
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 ro}{\f1  pronominal ending "he", in }{\b\f1 antav\'e1ro}{\f1 , q.v.}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab rocco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "horse" }{\i\f1 (ROK, SA:roch; Letters:382; cf. 282 where the spelling really is }{\b\i\f1 rocco}{\i\f1 , not }{\b\i\f1 rokko}{\i\f1 . In Letters:382 the word is defined as "swift horse for riding".)}{\f1 

\par \tab *}{\b\f1 roim\'eb}{\f1  "hunt, hunting" (the spelling "raime" in the entry }{\i\f1 ROY}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1\fs12  }{\f1  in the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1  as printed in LR would seem to be a misreading, given the form of the root itself)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab roina}{\f1  "ruddy" }{\i\f1 (ROY}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab roita}{\f1 - "pursue"}{\i\f1  (ROY}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab r\'f3ma}{\f1  (1) "horn" }{\i\f1 (WJ:368 - this refers to a "horn" as an instrument rather than as part of an animal; see }{\b\i\f1 rass\'eb}{\i\f1 ,}{\b\i\f1  tarca}{\i\f1 )}{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 r\'f3ma}{\f1  (2) "loud sound, trumpet-sound"}{\i\f1  (ROM)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 r\'f3ma}{\f1  (3) "shoulder" }{\i\f1 (LT2:335; evidently obsoleted by # 1 and # 2 above.)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab romba}{\f1  "horn, trumpet" }{\i\f1 (ROM)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab r\'f3men}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 R\'f3men}{\f1  "east" }{\i\f1 (R\'d4, MEN, SA:men)}{\f1 , "uprising, sunrise, east" }{\i\f1 (SA:r\'f3men}{\f1 ); also name of tengwa 25 }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 R\'f3menna}{\f1 
, a place in the eastern part of N\'famenor, is simply the allative "eastward" }{\i\f1 (SA:r\'f3men)}{\f1 , cf. also }{\b\f1 r\'f3menna}{\f1  in LR:47, 56. Ablative }{\b\f1 R\'f3mello}{\f1  "from the East" or "[to one] from the East", hence Tolkien's t
ranslation "to those from the East" in his rendering of }{\i\f1 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\f1  (}{\i\f1 Nam}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 RGEO:67)}{\f1 . Masc. name }{\b\f1 R\'f3mendacil}{\f1  "East-victor" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A; cf. Letters:425)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab r\'f3menya}{\f1  "eastern" }{\i\f1 (R\'d4)
\par }{\f1 \tab -}{\b\f1 ron}{\f1  gen. pl. ending in }{\b\f1 aldaron}{\f1 , see }{\b\f1 alda}{\f1 . The -}{\b\f1 r}{\f1  is actually the nominative pl. ending, to which is appended the genitive ending -}{\b\f1 o}{\f1  and a second plural marker, -}{\b\f1 n}{
\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab r\'f3na}{\f1  "east" (probably adj.) }{\i\f1 (R\'d4)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab rondo}{\f1  "a vaulted or arched roof, as seen from below" (and usually not visible from outside); "a (large) hall or chamber so roofed", "vaulted hall" }{\i\f1 (WJ:414; VT39:9; in the }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1 
, stem ROD, the gloss is simply "cave")}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 ronta}{\f1  "hollow" (adj? noun?) (also }{\b\f1 rotwa}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (LT2:347. In Tolkien's later Quenya, the preferred words for "hollow" are }{\b\i\f1 unqua}{\i\f1  adj. and }{\b\i\f1 unqu\'eb}{\i\f1  noun.)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ronya}{\f1  " 'chaser', hound of chase" }{\i\f1 (ROY}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab roquen}{\f1  "horseman }{\i\f1 [but the Quenya word does not show gender]}{\f1 , rider, knight" }{\i\f1 (WJ:372, UT:282)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ross\'eb}{\f1  "fine rain, dew" }{\i\f1 (ROS}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 , PM:371)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 rosta}{\f1  "ascent" }{\i\f1 (LT1:267)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 r\'f3ta}{\f1  "tube" }{\i\f1 (LT2:347)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 rotel\'eb}{\f1  "cave" }{\i\f1 (LT2:347)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 rots\'eb}{\f1  "pipe" }{\i\f1 (LT2:347)}{\f1 ; pl. }{\b\f1 rotser}{\f1  (?) in }{\i\f1 Narqelion}{\f1 ? (Cf. }{\i\f1 QL:xiv}{\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab rotto}{\f1  "a small grot or tunnel" }{\i\f1 (PM:365)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 rotwa}{\f1  "hollow" (adj? noun?) (also }{\b\f1 ronta}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (LT2:347. In Tolkien's later Quenya, the preferred words for "hollow" are }{\b\i\f1 unqua}{\i\f1  adj. and }{\b\i\f1 unqu\'eb}{\i\f1  noun.)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab R\'fa}{\f1  "Dr\'fbg", }{\b\f1 R\'faatan}{\f1  pl. }{\b\f1 R\'faatani}{\f1  "Dr\'faedain" }{\i\f1 (UT:385)}{\b\f1 
\par \tab ruc}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "feel fear or horror" (1st pers. aorist }{\b\f1 rucin}{\f1  "I feel fear or horror"); the verb is said to be constructed with "from" (sc. the ablative case?) of the object feared. }{\i\f1 (WJ:415)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab r\'facima}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "terrible" }{\i\f1 (WJ:415)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab r\'facina}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "confused, shattered, disordered, ruined" in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1  (the first version of this poem had "red skies", MC:215, changed to "ruined skies" in the final version; see MC:220, note 8)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ruhta}{\f1 - "terrify" }{\i\f1 (WJ:415)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab r\'fama}{\f1 - "shift, move, heave (of large and heavy things)"; participle }{\b\f1 r\'famala}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 ; this was changed to }{\b\f1 r\'fama}{\f1 , evidently the naked verbal stem used as participle
\par }{\b\f1 \tab R\'famil}{\f1  masc. name, genitive }{\b\f1 R\'familo}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ:398)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab runda}{\f1  "rough piece of wood" }{\i\f1 (RUD)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab r\'fanya}{\b\i\f1  }{\f1 "red flame" }{\i\f1 (SA:ruin; PM:366 gives }{\b\i\f1 runya}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab runya}{\f1  "slot, footprint" }{\i\f1 (RUN; according to PM:366 }{\b\i\f1 runya}{\i\f1  also means "red flame", but SA:ruin has }{\b\i\f1 r\'fanya}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par \tab [}{\b\f1 rusca}{\f1 ] "red-brown" }{\i\f1 (VT41:10)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab rusco}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 ruscu}{\f1 -, pl. }{\b\f1 rusqui}{\f1 ) "fox" }{\i\f1 (PM:353, VT41:10)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 ruscuit\'eb}{\f1  "foxy" }{\i\f1 (VT41:10)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 russa}{\f1  "red-haired" }{\i\f1 (VT41:10)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Russandol}{\f1  "Copper-top", a nickname (}{\b\f1 epess\'eb}{\f1 ) of Maitimo/Nelyafinw\'eb (= Maedhros) }{\i\f1 (PM:354)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab russ\'eb}{\f1  (1) "(a head or pelt of) red hair" }{\i\f1 (VT41:10)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 russ\'eb}{\f1  (2) "corruscation, \'86sword-blade" }{\i\f1 (RUS)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab rusta }{\f1 "broken" }{\i\f1 (MC:214; this is "Qenya") }{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ruste}{\f1  "crumbling" }{\i\f1 (MC:214; this is "Qenya") }{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1 \tab #}{\b\f1 ruxa}{\f1 - "crumble"; verbal stem only attested as a participle }{\b\f1 ruxal'}{\f1  "crumbling" in the }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1  poem, elided from *}{\b\f1 ruxala}{\f1  (since the next word begins in an }{\b\f1 a}{\f1 ).}{\i\f1 
\par }{\f1 \tab -}{\b\f1 rya}{\f1  pronominal ending "his, her" }{\i\f1 (Nam, RGEO:67)}{\f1  in }{\b\f1 m\'e1ryat}{\f1  "her hands", }{\b\f1 \'f3maryo}{\f1  "of her voice" (genitive of *}{\b\f1 \'f3marya}{\f1  "her voice"), }{\b\f1 s\'famaryass\'eb}{\f1 
 "in her bosom" (locative of }{\b\f1 s\'famarya}{\f1  "her bosom"); for the meaning "his" cf. }{\b\f1 coarya}{\f1  "his house" }{\i\f1 (WJ:369)
\par }{\f1 
\par <S>
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 s}{\f1  (1) pronominal ending "it", seen in }{\b\f1 caritas}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tiruvantes}{\f1 , and }{\b\f1 ut\'favienyes}{\f1 , q.v. May also be used for "he/she" as in }{\b\f1 eques}{\f1  (q.v.); it seems that -}{\b\f1 s }{\f1 
covers the entire 3rd person singular.
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 s}{\f1  (2) ending for the mysterious case sometimes called "respective". Pl. -}{\b\f1 is}{\f1 , dual -}{\b\f1 tes}{\f1 , partitive pl. -}{\b\f1 lis}{\f1 .
\par \tab }{\b\f1 s\'e1}{\f1  "fire" }{\i\f1 (LT1:265; "Qenya" spelling }{\b\i\f1 s\'e2}{\i\f1 . Use rather }{\b\i\f1 n\'e1r\'eb}{\i\f1  in LotR-style Quenya.)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab saccant\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "rent" (past tense of an otherwise unattested verb #}{\b\f1 saccat}{\f1 - "rend"?) }{\i\f1 (SD:246)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 Sah\'f3ra}{\f1  "the South" }{\i\f1 (LT1:248, 255; rather }{\b\i\f1 Hyarmen}{\i\f1  in LotR-style Quenya)}{\f1 
\par \tab #}{\b\f1 saila}{\f1  "wise" (isolated from }{\b\f1 alasaila}{\f1  "unwise" in a late source)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab saira}{\f1  "wise" }{\i\f1 (SAY; a later source has the alternative formation #}{\b\i\f1 saila}{\i\f1  as above)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 sairina}{\f1  "magic" (evidently adj.) }{\i\f1 (GL:72)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sairon}{\f1  "wizard" }{\i\f1 (SAY)}{\f1 ; according to LT2:337 and GL:29, }{\b\f1 Sairon}{\f1  is also the Quenya name of Dairon (Daeron).}{\i\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 saiwa}{\f1  "hot"}{\i\f1  (LT1:248, 255, 265)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 salma}{\f1  "lyre" }{\i\f1 (LT1:265)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Salmar}{\f1  (masc. name; etymology unclear - cf. }{\b\f1 salma}{\f1 ?) }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 salm\'eb}{\f1  "harp-playing" }{\i\f1 (LT1:265; rather }{\b\i\f1 nandel\'eb}{\i\f1  in Tolkien's later Quenya)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab salpa}{\f1 - (1) }{\i\f1 (verb)}{\f1  "lick up, sup, sip" }{\i\f1 (S\'c1LAP)}{\f1 , "take a sup of" }{\i\f1 (LT1:266)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 salpa}{\f1  (2) }{\i\f1 (noun)}{\f1  "bowl" }{\i\f1 (LT1:266)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab salqu\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "grass" }{\i\f1 (SAL\'c1K-(W\'ca) )}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 s\'e1ma}{\f1  "mind" (pl. }{\b\f1 s\'e1mar}{\f1  and dual }{\b\f1 samat}{\f1  [sic, read *}{\b\f1 s\'e1mat}{\f1 ?] are given) }{\i\f1 (VT39:23, VT41:5)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab samb\'eb}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "room, chamber" }{\i\f1 (STAB)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab samna}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "wooden post" }{\i\f1 (STAB)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab samnar}{\f1  "diphthongs" (sg. #}{\b\f1 samna}{\f1  "diphthong"?)}{\i\f1  (SAM)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab samno}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "carpenter, wright, builder" }{\i\f1 (STAB)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab san }{\f1 "then" }{\i\f1 (MC:216; also twice in Narqelion)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 sana}{\f1  "day (24 hours)" }{\i\f1 (LT1:250; the later word }{\b\i\f1 r\'e9}{\i\f1  is to be preferred to this early "Qenya" form, the plural of which would clash with }{\b\i\f1 sanar}{\i\f1  below.)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 sanar}{\f1  "mind" (literally "thinker" or "reflector", suggesting an underlying verb #}{\b\f1 sana}{\f1 - "to think, to reflect") }{\i\f1 (VT41:13)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 Sanavaldo}{\f1  "the Almighty" }{\i\f1 (SD:401)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sanca}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "cleft, split" }{\i\f1 (STAK)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 sanc\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "hateful" }{\i\f1 (LT2:341)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 Sancossi}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "the Goblins" }{\i\f1 (LT2:341)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sanda}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "firm, true, abiding" }{\i\f1 (STAN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sandastan}{\f1  "shield-barrier", a battle-formation }{\i\f1 (UT:282; probably }{\b\i\f1 sandastam}{\i\f1 - since the final element is derived from a stem }{\f1 stama}{\i\f1 - "bar, exclude". Compare }{\b\i\f1 talan}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 talam}{
\i\f1 - from TALAM.)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sanga}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "crowd, press, throng" }{\i\f1 (STAG, SA:thang, LT2:342; pl. }{\b\i\f1 sangar}{\i\f1  (?) twice in Narqelion)}{\f1 . In }{\b\f1 Sangahyando}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "Throng-cleaver", name of a man in Gondor 
}{\i\f1 (SA:thang; a footnote in Letters:425 explains that "throng" here means a closely formed body of enemy soldiers. In the }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1 , stems STAG, SYAD, }{\b\i\f1 sangahyando}{\i\f1 
 is said to be a swordname, and LT2:342 likewise defines the word as a name of Turambar's sword: "cleaver of throngs, Throng-cleaver".
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sangan\'eb}{\f1  "gather" }{\i\f1 (MC:214; this is "Qenya") }{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sangwa}{\f1  "poison" }{\i\f1 (SAG)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 sanw\'eb}{\f1  "thought, an act of thinking" }{\i\f1 (VT39:23, 30; VT41:5, 13)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 sanwecenda}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "thought-inspection, thought-reading" }{\i\f1 (VT41:5)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 sanw\'eb-latya}{\f1  "thought-opening", direct, telepathic thought-transfer }{\i\f1 (VT39:23)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 sanwe-menta}{\f1  "thought-sending, mental message"
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab sanya}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "regular, law-abiding, normal" }{\i\f1 (STAN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sany\'eb}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "rule, law"}{\i\f1  (STAN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sapsanta}{\f1  "grave-into" }{\i\f1 (MC:221; this is "Qenya"; note obsolete allative in -}{\b\i\f1 nta}{\i\f1 , later dual allative only)}{\b\f1 
\par \tab sar}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 sard}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 sardi}{\f1 ) "(small) stone" }{\i\f1 (SAR)}{\f1 . In }{\b\f1 Elessar}{\f1 , q.v. }{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab s\'e1ra}{\f1  (1) "bitter"}{\i\f1  (SAG)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 s\'e1ra}{\f1  (2) "fiery" }{\i\f1 (LT1:248; this "Qenya" word may have been obsoleted by # 1 above)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sara}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "stiff dry grass, bent" }{\i\f1 (STAR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sarat}{\f1  (pl. }{\b\f1 sarati}{\f1  given) "letter", any individual significant mark, used of the letters of R\'famil after the invention of F\'ebanor's tengwar }{\i\f1 (WJ:396)}{\f1 . Cf. }{\b\f1 sarm\'eb}{\f1 .
\par \tab }{\b\f1 sarco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "flesh" }{\i\f1 (LT2:347; Tolkien's later Quenya has }{\b\i\f1 hr\'e1v\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 sarcuva}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "corporeal, bodily" }{\i\f1 (LT2:347)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 sarda}{\f1  "hard" }{\i\f1 (VT39:17)}{\f1 ; pl. }{\b\f1 sard\'eb}{\f1  "hards" may be used in the same sense as }{\b\f1 sarda tengwi}{\f1 , q.v. (As an independent form we would rather expect 
a nominal pl. }{\b\f1 sardar}{\f1 .)
\par #}{\b\f1 sarda tengw\'eb}{\f1  "hard sound", a term for "consonant", but not used of semi-vowels (}{\i\f1 y}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 w}{\f1 )  and continuants (}{\i\f1 l}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 r}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 m}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 n}{\f1 ). (Only pl. }{\b\f1 sarda tengwi}{\f1 
 }{\i\f1 [\'f1]}{\f1  is attested; we would rather expect #}{\b\f1 sard\'eb tengwi}{\f1  with the pl. form of the adjective.) }{\b\f1 Sarda tengwi}{\f1  are also simply called }{\b\f1 sard\'eb}{\f1  "hards", see }{\b\f1 sarda}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (VT39:17)}{
\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 sarm\'eb}{\f1  "writing" }{\i\f1 (VT39:8)}{\f1 . Cf. }{\b\f1 sarat}{\f1 .
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab sarna}{\f1  "of stone" }{\i\f1 (SAR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sarn\'eb}{\f1  "strong place" }{\i\f1 (SAR)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 sarni\'eb}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 sarniy\'eb}{\f1 ) "shingle, pebble-bank" }{\i\f1 (UT:463, }{\i VT42:11)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 sarqua}{\i\f1  ("q")}{\f1  "fleshy" }{\i\f1 (LT2:347)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 Sarquindi}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "Cannibal-ogres" }{\i\f1 (LT2:347)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b sati}{-, verb "set aside, appropriate to a special purpose or owner" }{\i (VT42:20)}{. The final -}{\b i}{ may be simply the connecting vowel of the aorist (as in *}{\b satin}{ "I set aside").}{\f1 

\par }{\b satya}{ "private, separate, not common, excluded" }{\i (VT42:20)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab saura}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "foul, evil-smelling, putrid"}{\i\f1  (THUS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Sauro}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Sauron}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "the Abhorred", name of a Maia. Earlier }{\b\f1 Thauron}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (SA:thaur, THUS)}{\f1 , archaic *}{\b\f1 thaurond}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 
(Letters:380, where a special letter is used instead of the digraph }{\b\i\f1 th}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 . The stem of }{\b\f1 Sauron}{\f1  would then be *}{\b\f1 Saurond}{\f1 -.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab s\'e1va}{\f1  "juice" }{\i\f1 (SAB)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 S\'e1ya}{\f1  name of the fire-fay }{\i\f1 (GL:66)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab selda}{\f1  (meaning not clear, related to }{\b\f1 seld\'eb}{\f1  "child" [meaning changed from "daughter"] and }{\b\f1 seldo}{\f1  *"boy", perhaps an adjective *"childlike", since -}{\b\f1 a}{\f1 
 is a frequent adjectival ending) }{\i\f1 (SEL-D)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab seld\'eb}{\f1  "child" [meaning changed by Tolkien from "daughter"] }{\i\f1 (SEL-D)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab seldo}{\f1  (meaning not clear, perhaps the masculine form of }{\b\f1 seld\'eb}{\f1  "child", hence *"boy") }{\i\f1 (SEL-D)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab seler}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) (}{\b\f1 sell}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 selli}{\f1 ) "sister" }{\i\f1 (THEL/THELES)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab selli}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) pl. of }{\b\i\f1 seler}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (THEL/THELES)
\par }{\f1 \tab *}{\b\f1 selma}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "a fixed idea, will" }{\i\f1 (WJ:319; only the archaic/Vanyarin form }{\b\i\f1 \'deelma}{\i\f1  [}{\b\i\f1 thelma}{\i\f1 ] is given)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab senda}{\f1  "resting, at peace"}{\i\f1  (SED)}{\f1 
\par \tab *}{\b\f1 send\'eb}{\f1  see }{\b\f1 ser}{\f1 -
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 ser}{\f1  "friend"}{\i\f1  (SER)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ser}{\f1 - "rest" (1st pers. aorist }{\b\f1 serin}{\f1  "I rest"); pa.t. probably *}{\b\f1 send\'eb}{\f1  since the R of }{\b\f1 ser}{\f1 - was originally D }{\i\f1 (cf. stem SED; compare }{\b\i\f1 rer}{\i\f1 - pa.t. }{\b\i\f1 rend\'eb}{
\i\f1  from RED concerning the past tense)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab serc\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "blood" }{\i\f1 (SA:sereg; the }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1  gives }{\b\i\f1 y\'e1r}{\i\f1  as the Quenya word for "blood")
\par }{\b\f1 \tab s\'e9r\'eb}{\f1  "rest, repose, peace" (}{\i\f1 SED}{\f1 ); see under }{\b\f1 \'fay\'eb}{\f1  concerning the sentence }{\b\f1 \'fay\'eb s\'e9r\'eb indo-ninya s\'edmen}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 F\'edriel's Song
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Serind\'eb}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) fem. name; "Broideress" }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1  or "Needlewoman" }{\i\f1 (PM:333)}{\f1 . Original form }{\b\f1 Therind\'eb}{\f1 , q.v.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab serm\'eb}{\f1  "friend" (fem.) }{\i\f1 (SER)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sermo}{\f1  "friend" (evidently masc., since }{\b\f1 serm\'eb}{\f1  is stated to be fem.) }{\i\f1 (SER)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab seron}{\f1  "friend"}{\i\f1  (SER)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab s\'ed}{\f1  "now"}{\i\f1  (Nam, RGEO:67, LR:47, SD:310)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 sin}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (SI, LR:47)}{\f1  or }{\b\f1 s\'edn}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (SD:247, 310) }{\f1 before vowels. Compare the distribution of }{\i\f1 a}{\f1 /}{\i\f1 an}{\f1 
 in English. In F\'edriel's Song, }{\b\f1 s\'ed}{\f1  is translated "here".
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sicil}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "dagger, knife" }{\i\f1 (SIK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sil}{\f1 - "shine" (white), present tense }{\b\f1 s\'edla}{\f1  "shines, is shining" }{\i\f1 (FG)}{\f1 ; aorist }{\b\f1 sil\'eb}{\f1 , pl. }{\b\f1 silir}{\f1  (}{\i\f1 The Return of the Shadow:324}{\f1 ), frequentative }{\b\f1 sis\'edla}{\f1 
- (}{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1  comments)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab silda-r\'e1nar}{\f1  "in gleaming-moon" (locative -}{\b\f1 r}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (MC:213; this is "Qenya"; cf. }{\b\i\f1 sild\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 sildai}{\f1  ??? }{\i\f1 (Narqelion)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sild\'eb}{\f1  "gleaming" (?) }{\i\f1 (MC:214; this is "Qenya"; cf. }{\b\i\f1 silda-r\'e1nar}{\i\f1 )}{\b\f1 
\par \tab silima}{\f1  the substance the Silmarils were made of, invented by F\'ebanor }{\i\f1 (SA:sil)
\par }{\f1 Silindo "Jupiter" }{\i\f1 (LT1:265; this planet is called }{\b\i\f1 Alcarinqu\'eb}{\i\f1  in Tolkien's later Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab silma}{\f1  "silver, shining white" (adj.) }{\i\f1 (SIL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Silmarien}{\i\f1  (sometimes "-ri\'ebn")}{\f1  fem. name, apparently incorporates }{\b\f1 sil}{\f1 (}{\b\f1 i}{\f1 )}{\b\f1 ma}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Silmaril}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 Silmarill}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 Silmarilli}{\f1 ) name of the shining jewels made by F\'ebanor; full sg. form }{\b\f1 Silmarill\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (SA:sil, SIL, RIL, MIR)}{\f1 .}{\i\f1  }{\f1 Trans
lated "radiance of pure light" in Letters:148. Gen. pl. }{\b\f1 Silmarillion}{\f1 , as in (}{\b\f1 Quenta}{\f1 ) }{\b\f1 Silmarillion}{\f1  "(the Story) of the Silmarils".}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab silm\'eb}{\f1  "starlight", also name of tengwa 29 }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 silm\'eb nuquerna}{\f1  "}{\i\f1 s }{\f1 reversed", name of tengwa 30, similar to normal }{\b\f1 silm\'eb}{\f1  but turned upside down }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)
}{\f1 . In the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1 , stem SIL, }{\b\f1 silm\'eb}{\f1  is defined as the "light of Silpion" (Telperion), and also a poetic word for "silver".}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Silmer\'e1no}{\f1  "of silver moon" }{\i\f1 (MC:220; this is "Qenya")}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Silmeross\'eb}{\f1  a name of Silpion (Telperion) }{\i\f1 (ROS}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 , SIL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Silpion}{\f1  a name of the Elder of the Two Trees of Valinor (Telperion, the White Tree). }{\i\f1 (Silm, SIL, S\'cdLIP, BAL, ROS}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 , LR:385)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab silquelosse\'ebn }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "blossom-white hair" }{\i\f1 (MC:216; this is "Qenya")}{\b\f1 
\par \tab s\'edmen}{\f1  "here" }{\i\f1 (FS; cf. }{\b\i\f1 sinom\'eb}{\i\f1  in EO)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 simpa}{\f1  "pipe, flute" }{\i\f1 (LT1:266)}{\f1  
\par }{\b\f1 \tab simpetalla }{\f1 ??? }{\i\f1 (Narqelion)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab simpetar}{\f1  "piper" }{\i\f1 (LT1:266)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab simpina}{\f1  "pipe, flute" }{\i\f1 (LT1:266)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab simpis\'eb}{\f1  "piping" }{\i\f1 (LT1:266)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sin}{\f1  (1) a word either meaning "thus" (adverb) }{\i\f1 or}{\f1  "this" (as an independent word in the sentence, not modifying another word like }{\b\f1 sina}{\f1  does). Attested in the sentence }{\b\f1 sin quent\'eb
 Quendingoldo Elendilenna}{\f1 , either *"this Pengolodh said to Elendil" or "thus spoke Pengolodh to Elendil" }{\i\f1 (PM:401)}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sin}{\f1  (2) a form of }{\b\f1 s\'ed}{\f1  "now" (q.v.) occurring before vowels, possibly replaced by }{\b\f1 s\'edn}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (SI)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sina}{\f1  "this" (}{\i\f1 following}{\f1  its noun in our sole example: }{\b\f1 vanda sina}{\f1  "this oath"). }{\i\f1 (CO) }{\f1 Cf. }{\b\f1 sin}{\f1  (1).}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sincahonda}{\f1  "flint-hearted" }{\i\f1 (LotR3:VI ch. 6)}{\f1 . Hence #}{\b\f1 sinca}{\f1  "flint"?
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sinda}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "grey"; nominal pl. }{\b\f1 Sindar}{\f1  used = "Grey-elves", lit. *"Grey ones"; see WJ:375. Gen. pl. }{\b\f1 Sindaron }{\f1 in WJ:369. With general meaning "grey" also in }{\b\f1 Sindacollo}{\f1  > }{\b\f1 
Singollo}{\f1  "Grey-cloak, Thingol" }{\i\f1 (SA:thin(d); see also }{\b\i\f1 sind\'eb}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 Sindicollo}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 ;}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 sindan\'f3ri\'eb}{\f1  "grey land", ablative }{\b\f1 sindan\'f3riello}{\f1  "from/out of a grey country" }{
\i\f1 (Nam)}{\f1 . However, other sources give }{\b\f1 sind\'eb}{\f1  (q.v.) as the Quenya word for "grey"; perhaps }{\b\f1 sinda}{\f1  came to mean primarily "Grey-elf" as a noun. Derived adjective }{\b\f1 Sindarin}{\f1 
 "Grey-elven", normally used of the Grey-elven language. }{\i\f1 (Appendix F)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sindarinwa}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "Grey-elven" in the phrase }{\b\f1 hwesta sindarinwa}{\f1  "Grey-elven }{\i\f1 hw}{\f1 " (Appendix E); it may really be "Sindarin" (as a noun) with the possessive ending -}{\b\f1 va}{\f1 , -}{\b\f1 wa}{
\f1  appended, hence literally "}{\i\f1 hw}{\f1  of [the] Sindarin [language]"}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sind\'eb}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "grey, pale or silvery grey" (the Vanyarin dialect preserves the older form }{\b\f1 \'deind\'eb}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (WJ:384, THIN; in SA:thin(d) the form given is }{\b\i\f1 sinda}{\i\f1 , cf. also }{\b\i\f1 
sindan\'f3riello}{\i\f1  "from a grey country" in Nam\'e1ri\'eb. }{\b\i\f1 Sind\'eb}{\i\f1  and }{\b\i\f1 sinda}{\i\f1  are apparently variants of the same word.) }{\f1 See }{\b\f1 Sindicollo}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Sindel}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) (}{\b\f1 Sindeld}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 Sindeldi}{\f1 ) "Grey-elf" = }{\b\f1 Sinda}{\f1  pl. }{\b\f1 Sindar}{\f1 , but less common }{\i\f1 (WJ:384)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 sindi}{\f1  "river" }{\i\f1 (LT1:265; rather }{\b\i\f1 s\'edr\'eb}{\i\f1  in LotR-style Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Sindicollo}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "Grey-cloak", title of Elw\'eb (Elu). Sindarin }{\i\f1 Thingol}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (WJ:410, MR:217)}{\f1 .}{\i\f1  }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 Sindi}{\f1 - in this name is a compound form of }{\b\f1 sind\'eb}{\f1 
, q.v.) Original form }{\b\f1 Thindicollo}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ:333)}{\f1 . The }{\i\f1 Silmarillion}{\f1  appendix }{\i\f1 (SA:thin(d) )}{\f1  gives }{\b\f1 Sindacollo}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Sindo}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) name of Elwe's brother }{\i\f1 (THIN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Singollo}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) contraction of }{\b\f1 Sindicollo}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\b\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sinom\'eb}{\f1  "in this place" (}{\i\f1 EO}{\f1 )
\par \tab }{\b\f1 sinqui }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  ??? }{\i\f1 (Narqelion)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 sinquit\'e1lar }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  ??? }{\i\f1 (Narqelion)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sinta}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) (1) "short" }{\i\f1 (STINT\'c2)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sinta}{\f1 - (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) (2) "fade", pa.t. }{\b\f1 sintan\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (THIN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sint\'eb}{\f1  pa.t. of }{\b\i\f1 ista}{\f1 -, q.v. }{\i\f1 (IS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sinya}{\f1  "new" }{\i\f1 (SI)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab siny\'eb}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "evening" }{\i\f1 (THIN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sir}{\f1 - "flow" }{\i\f1 (SIR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab s\'edr\'eb}{\f1  "river" }{\i\f1 (SIR)}{\f1 , "stream" }{\i\f1 (LT1:265)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab siril}{\f1  "rivulet" }{\i\f1 (SIR)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 sirilla}{\f1  *"flowing", "Qenya" participle of }{\b\f1 siri}{\f1 - "flow" }{\i\f1 (Narqelion, cf. QL:xiv)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 s\'edrima}{\f1  "liquid, flowing" }{\i\f1 (LT1:265)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Siriondil}{\f1  masc .name, *"Sirion-friend" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sis\'edla}{\f1 - is said to be the "frequentative" form of }{\b\f1 sil}{\f1 - (MC:223); the participle }{\b\f1 sis\'edlala}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1  is simply translated "shining".
\par }{\b\f1 \tab siul\'eb}{\f1  "incitement"}{\i\f1  (SIW)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 soica}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "thirsty"}{\i\f1  (VT39:11)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 solm\'eb}{\f1  "wave" }{\i\f1 (LT1:266)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Solonel}{\f1  a name of the Teleri (here in the sg, pl. }{\b\f1 Soloneldi}{\f1 ). Note that this form is influenced by Telerin; pure Quenya has }{\b\f1 Solonyeldi}{\f1 , sg. #}{\b\f1 Solonyel}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (PHAL/PH\'c1LAS, NYEL, SOL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab solor}{\f1  "surf"}{\i\f1  (SOL)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 solor}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 soloss\'eb}{\f1  "surf, surge" }{\i\f1 (LT1:266)
\par \tab }{\b\f1 soloss\'eb}{\f1  "surf, surge" }{\i\f1 (LT1:266)}{\f1 ; also }{\b\f1 solor}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 sor}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 sorn\'eb}{\f1  "eagle" }{\i\f1 (LT1:266)}{\f1 ; rather }{\b\f1 sorno}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 soron}{\f1  in LotR-style Quenya 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 s\'f3ra}{\f1  "long, trailing" }{\i\f1 (LT2:344)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sornion }{\f1 "eyrie" }{\i\f1 (LT1:266)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sorno}{\f1  "eagle" (archaic }{\b\f1 thorno}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (Letters:427). }{\f1 Also }{\b\f1 soron}{\f1 . Early "Qenya" has }{\b\f1 sor}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 sorn\'eb }{\i\f1 (LT1:266)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab soron}{\f1  (or }{\b\f1 sorn\'eb}{\f1 ) (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "eagle", before an ending }{\b\f1 sorn}{\f1 - as in pl. }{\b\f1 sorni}{\f1 , "gen.sg....}{\i\f1 sornen}{\f1 "; in LotR-style Quenya this would be the dative singular instead }{
\i\f1 (THOR/THORON)}{\f1 . SD:290 has the pl.}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 soroni}{\f1  "eagles", changed to }{\b\f1 sorni}{\f1  as in the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1 . Early "Qenya" has the forms }{\b\f1 sor}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 sorn\'eb }{\i\f1 (LT1:266)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Sorontar}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "King of Eagles", Sindarin }{\i\f1 Thorondor}{\f1 , name of a great Eagle }{\i\f1 (SA:thoron, THOR/THORON, T\'c2/TA3)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Soron\'fam\'eb}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ?) (name of a constellation, apparently incorporating }{\b\f1 soron}{\f1  "eagle") }{\i\f1 (SA:thoron)
\par }{\f1 \tab -}{\b\f1 ss\'eb}{\f1  locative ending; in }{\b\f1 L\'f3riendess\'eb}{\f1 , q.v.; pl. -}{\b\f1 ssen}{\f1  in }{\b\f1 yassen}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 mahalmassen}{\f1 , q.v. The part. pl. (-}{\b\f1 liss\'eb}{\f1  or -}{\b\f1 lissen}{\f1 ) and dual (}{
\b\f1 -ts\'eb}{\f1 ) locative endings are known from the Plotz letter only.
\par \tab }{\b\f1 s\'fa}{\f1  "noise of wind" }{\i\f1 (LT1:266; "Qenya" spelling }{\b\i\f1 s\'fb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab suc}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "to drink" (1st pers. aorist }{\b\f1 sucin}{\f1  "I drink") }{\i\f1 (SUK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab suhto}{\f1  "draught" }{\i\f1 (SUK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sulca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "root" (especially as edible) }{\i\f1 (S\'daLUK)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab s\'fal\'eb}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "spirit, breath", also name of tengwa 9; originally }{\b\f1 th\'fal\'eb}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de\'fal\'eb}{\f1 ), before the shift }{\b\f1 th}{\f1  > }{\b\f1 s}{\f1 
 that occurred shortly before the rebellion of the Noldor }{\i\f1 (Appendix E, TH\'db)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab s\'falimarya}{\f1  ??? }{\i\f1 (Narqelion)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 S\'falim\'eb}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ?) third month of the year, "March". The word apparently means *"windy one" }{\i\f1 (Appendix D; SA:s\'fbl; not capitalized in the latter source)}{\f1 . Early "Qenya" has }{\b\f1 s\'falim\'eb}{\f1 
 "wind" }{\i\f1 (LT1:266)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab S\'falimo}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) surname of Manwe (wind-god) }{\i\f1 (TH\'db, SA:s\'fbl)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab s\'falo}{\f1  "goblet" }{\i\f1 (SUG; see SUK)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 sulp}{\f1 - "lick" }{\i\f1 (LT1:266; rather }{\b\i\f1 lav}{\i\f1 - in Tolkien's later Quenya)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 sulpa}{\f1  "soup" }{\i\f1 (LT1:266)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab s\'fama}{\f1  "hollow cavity, bosom"; cf. }{\b\f1 s\'famaryass\'eb}{\f1  "in her bosom" (}{\b\f1 s\'fama-rya-ss\'eb}{\f1  "bosom-her-in") in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sundo}{\f1  "base, root, root-word" }{\i\f1 (SUD)}{\f1 , sc. a Quendian consonantal "base"
\par \tab }{\b\f1 sund\'f3ma}{\f1  *"base-vowel" (}{\b\f1 sundo}{\f1  + }{\b\f1 \'f3ma}{\f1 ), the determinant vowel of a "base" or root  (Christopher Tolkien gives the example KAT, which stem has the }{\i\f1 sund\'f3ma}{\f1  A; the stem TALAT has the }{\i\f1 
sund\'f3ma}{\f1  repeated; in derivative forms the }{\i\f1 sund\'f3ma}{\f1  might be placed before the first consonant; e.g. ATALAT) }{\i\f1 (WJ:319)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab sungwa}{\f1  "drinking-vessel" }{\i\f1 (SUK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab s\'far\'eb}{\f1  "wind", instrumental }{\b\f1 s\'farinen}{\f1  "in the wind" or more literally *"by the wind" (}{\i\f1 Nam, RGEO:66,}{\f1  }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 ); }{\b\f1 S\'farion}{\f1  masc.name, *"Wind-son" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 
. Early "Qenya" has }{\b\f1 s\'faru}{\i\f1  (MC:213, 216, 220)}{\f1 
\par \tab #}{\b\f1 suri\'eb }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{), possibly a noun "seeking"; see }{\b minasuri\'eb}{.}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab S\'faro}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) alternative form of }{\i\f1 Sauro(n)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (THUS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab s\'faru}{\f1  "wind" }{\i\f1 (MC:213, 216, 220; this is "Qenya"; Tolkien's later Quenya has }{\b\i\f1 s\'far\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab surya}{\f1  "spirant consonant" }{\i\f1 (SUS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab s\'faya}{\f1 - (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) "breathe"}{\i\f1  (TH\'db)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 s\'fayer}{\f1  ??? }{\i\f1 (Narqelion)}{\f1 
\par 
\par <T>
\par }\pard \qj\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab -}{\b\f1 t}{\f1  (1) dual ending, denoting a }{\i\f1 pair }{\f1 of something: }{\b\f1 m\'e1ryat}{\f1  "her (pair of) hands" (}{\i\f1 Nam}{\f1 
). Other dual endings known from the Plotz letter: genitive -}{\b\f1 to}{\f1 , possessive -}{\b\f1 twa}{\f1 , dative -}{\b\f1 nt}{\f1 , locative -}{\b\f1 ts\'eb}{\f1 , allative -}{\b\f1 nta}{\f1 , ablative -}{\b\f1 lto}{\f1 , instrumental -}{\b\f1 nten}{
\f1 , "respective" -}{\b\f1 tes}{\f1 .
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab -}{\b\f1 t}{\f1  (2) "them", pronominal ending; seen in the word }{\b\f1 laituvalmet}{\f1  "we shall bless them" (}{\b\f1 lait-uva-lme-t}{\f1  "bless-shall-we-them"). Also independent word }{\b\f1 te}{
\f1 .
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 t}{\f1  (3) reduced pronominal affix of the 2. person, "you" (sg.). See }{\b\f1 heca!}{\i\f1  (WJ:364) }{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 t\'e1}{\f1  "high" }{\i\f1 (LT1:264; there spelt }{\b\i\f1 t\'e2}{\i\f1 . This is hardly a valid word in Tolkien's later Quenya, but cf. }{\b\i\f1 t\'e1ra}{\i\f1  "lofty".)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ta}{\f1  "that, it" }{\i\f1 (TA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tac}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "fasten" (the form }{\b\f1 tac\'eb}{\f1  given in the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1  is translated "he fastens", evidently the 3rd person sg. aorist), pa.t. }{\b\f1 tanc\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (TAK)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b tai}{ ?"that which" (}{\b ta}{ + }{\b i}{) }{\i (VT42:34)}{. The word occurs in the sentence }{\b alasaila n\'e1 l\'e1 car\'eb tai mo nav\'eb m\'e1ra}{
, translated "it is unwise not to do what one judges good". So }{\b tai}{ = "what", but it may seem to mean more literally "that which" (cf. }{\b ta}{).}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab tail\'eb}{\f1  "lengthening, extension" }{\i\f1 (TAY)}{\f1 
\par \tab #}{\b\f1 taima}{\f1  "lengthening, extension" in }{\b\f1 \'f3mataima}{\f1 , q.v.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Taimavar}{\f1  "Shepherd of the Sky", Orion }{\i\f1 (LT1:268; Orion is called }{\b\i\f1 Telumehtar}{\i\f1  or }{\b\i\f1 Menelmacar}{\i\f1  in Tolkien's later Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Taim\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Taimi\'eb}{\f1  "the sky" }{\i\f1 (LT1:268; rather }{\b\i\f1 menel}{\i\f1  in LotR-style Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Taimondo}{\f1 , also }{\b\f1 Taimordo}{\f1  "Orion" }{\i\f1 (LT1:268; Orion is called }{\b\i\f1 Telumehtar}{\i\f1  or }{\b\i\f1 Menelmacar}{\i\f1  in Tolkien's later Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab taina}{\f1  "lengthened, extended" }{\i\f1 (TAY)}{\f1 , "stretched, elongated" }{\i\f1 (VT39:7)}{\f1 , also noun "extension" in the compound }{\b\f1 \'f3mataina}{\f1 , q.v.}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab taita}{\f1 - "to prolong" }{\i\f1 (TAY)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab t\'e1l}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 tal}{\f1 -, as in "g.sg. }{\i\f1 talen}{\f1 "; in LotR-style Quenya this is rather the dative singular) "foot"}{\i\f1  (TAL)}{\f1 . Early "Qenya" forms:}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 tala}{\f1  "foot" }{\i\f1 (LT2:347)}{\f1  and dual 
}{\b\f1 talwi}{\f1  "the feet" }{\i\f1 (LT2:347)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 t\'e1lin}{\f1  "feet" }{\i\f1 (MC:216)}{\f1 ; instrumental }{\b\f1 talainen}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 talal\'ednen }{\f1 "with wings, on wings" (wings here meaning sails) }{\i\f1 
(MC:213, 216, 220; this is "Qenya")}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab talan}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 talam}{\f1 -, e.g. pl. }{\b\f1 talami}{\f1 ) "floor, base, ground" }{\i\f1 (TALAM)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab talanti\'eb}{\f1  "he is fallen" }{\i\f1 (FS; see -}{\b\i\f1 i\'eb}{\i\f1  #2 concerning the doubtful authority of this stative verb ending in LotR-style Quenya)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 talas}{\f1  "sole" }{\i\f1 (LT2:347; Tolkien's later Quenya has }{\b\i\f1 tallun\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab talat}{\f1 - a stem used for "slipping, sliding, falling down" }{\i\f1 (Letters:347)}{\f1 , cf. }{\b\f1 talta}{\f1 - and }{\b\f1 talanti\'eb}{\f1  
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {#}{\b talca}{ }{\i ("k")}{ "post, mark" isolated from }{\b lantalca}{ "boundary post or mark" }{\i (VT42:28)}{\i\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab tallun\'eb}{\f1  "sole of foot" }{\i\f1 (TALAM, RUN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab talma}{\f1  "base, foundation, root" }{\i\f1 (TALAM)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Talmar Ambaren}{\f1  (place-name, *"Foundations of the World" - this is pre-classical "Qenya" with genitive in -}{\b\f1 en}{\f1  instead of -}{\b\f1 o}{\f1 
 as in LotR-style Quenya) }{\i\f1 (TALAM)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab talta}{\f1  adj. "sloping, tilted, leaning" or "incline" as a noun}{\i\f1  (TAL\'c1T)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab talta}{\f1 - "slip, slide down, collapse, slope" }{\i\f1 (TAL\'c1T)}{\f1 ; reduplicated stem in the participle }{\b\f1 talta}{\f1 -}{\b\f1 taltala}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 , simply translated "falling" in MC:215}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tam}{\f1 - "to tap" (1st pers. aorist }{\b\f1 tamin}{\f1  "I tap"), pa.t. }{\b\f1 tamn\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (TAM)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tamba}{\f1 - "to knock, keep on knocking"}{\i\f1  (TAM)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tambaro}{\f1  "woodpecker" }{\i\f1 (TAM)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 tamb\'eb}{\f1  "copper" }{\i\f1 (LT1:250; this is "Qenya"; see }{\b\i\f1 Urundil}{\i\f1  regarding a possible later word for copper)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 tambina}{\f1  "of copper" }{\i\f1 (LT1:250)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 tamin}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 taminn}{\f1 -) "forge" (noun) }{\i\f1 (LT1:250, cf. QL:88)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tampa}{\f1  "stopper"}{\i\f1  (TAP)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 tamp\'eb}{\f1  "copper" }{\i\f1 (LT1:268; in LotR-style Quenya }{\b\i\f1 tamp\'eb}{\i\f1  is [also?] the past tense of }{\b\i\f1 tap}{\i\f1 - "stop, block")}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tamp\'eb}{\f1  pa.t. of }{\b\i\f1 t\'e1p\'eb}{\f1 , see }{\b\i\f1 tap}{\i\f1 -}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (TAP)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tana}{\f1  "that" (anaphoric) }{\i\f1 (TA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab t\'e1na}{\f1  (meaning unclear, probably "high, lofty, noble") }{\i\f1 (T\'c2/TA3)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tana}{\f1 - "to show, indicate" }{\i\f1 (MR:350, 385, 471)}{\f1  (cf. the demonstrative }{\b\f1 tana}{\f1  "that")
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tanca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "firm, fixed, sure"}{\i\f1  (TAK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tanc\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  pa.t. of }{\b\i\f1 tac-}{\f1 , q.v. }{\i\f1 (TAK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tancil}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "pin, brooch" }{\i\f1 (TAK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Tancol}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("Tankol")}{\f1  "Signifer", "the significant star" = Venus }{\i\f1 (MR:385)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tande }{\f1 "thither" }{\i\f1 (MC:215; this is "Qenya")}{\b\f1 
\par \tab tango}{\f1  "twang" }{\i\f1 (TING/TANG)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tangwa}{\f1  "hasp, clasp"}{\i\f1  (TAK)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab taniquelass\'eb}{\f1  name of tree }{\i\f1 (UT:167)}{\f1 , perhaps }{\b\f1 Tanique(til)}{\f1  + }{\b\f1 lass\'eb}{\f1  "leaf"
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Taniquetil}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 Taniquetild}{\f1 -) the highest of the mountains of Valinor, upon which were the mansions of Manw\'eb and Varda; properly, this name refers to the topmost peak only, the whole mountain being called }{\b\f1 Oioloss
\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (SA:til)}{\f1 . The }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1  has }{\b\f1 Taniquetil}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Taniquetild\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 Ta-niqe-til}{\f1 ) ("g.sg." }{\b\i\f1 Taniquetilden}{\f1 , in LotR-style Quenya this is the da
tive singular) "High White Horn" }{\i\f1 (NIK-W, TIL, TA/TA3, OY)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tanna}{\f1  "sign" (noun) }{\i\f1 (MR:385)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tano}{\f1  "craftsman, smith" }{\i\f1 (TAN)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 tanta}{\f1  (1) noun "harp", also as verb }{\b\f1 tanta}{\f1 - "to play a harp" }{\i\f1 (VT41:10)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tanta}{\f1  (2) "double" (prob. adj)}{\i\f1  (TATA)}{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 tantila}{\f1  "harp" (noun) }{\i\f1 (VT41:10)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tanw\'eb}{\f1  "craft, thing made, decive, construction"}{\i\f1  (TAN)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tanya }{\f1 "that" }{\i\f1 (MC:215; this is "Qenya")}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tap}{\f1 - "stop, block" (the form }{\b\f1 t\'e1p\'eb}{\f1  given in the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1  is translated "he stops, blocks", evidently the 3rd person sg. aorist, though we would rather expect *}{\b\f1 tap\'eb}{\f1 ); pa.t. }{\b\f1 
tamp\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (TAP)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 tapta}{\f1  "impeded" }{\i\f1 (VT39:17)}{\f1 ; nominal pl. }{\b\f1 taptar}{\f1  is used to mean "consonants" ( = }{\b\f1 tapta tengwi}{\f1 , q.v.)
\par #}{\b\f1 tapta tengw\'eb}{\f1  phrase only attested in the pl.:}{\b\f1  tapta tengwi}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("\'f1")}{\f1  "impeded elements", a term for consonants. }{\i\f1 (In the pl. we would rather expect *}{\b\i\f1 tapt\'eb tengwi}{\i\f1 
 with the pl. form of the adjective.)}{\f1  Also simply }{\b\f1 tapta}{\f1  pl. }{\b\f1 taptar}{\i\f1  (VT39:17)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab tar }{\f1 (1) "thither"}{\i\f1  (TA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tar}{\f1  (2) "beyond" }{\i\f1 (FS)}{\f1 
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 tar}{\f1  element meaning "king" or "queen" in compounds and names }{\i\f1 (T\'c2/TA3)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab t\'e1r}{\f1  pl. }{\b\f1 t\'e1ri}{\f1  "king" (only used of the legitimate kings of whole tribes); the pl. must not be confused with the sg. }{\b\f1 t\'e1ri}{\f1  "queen" }{\i\f1 (T\'c2/TA3)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Tar}{\f1 - element prefixed to the names of the Kings and Queens of N\'famenor (e.g. }{\b\f1 Tar-Amandil}{\f1 ); see their individual names (like }{\b\f1 Amandil}{\f1  in this case), also in }{\b\f1 Tareldar}{\f1  "High-elves"; see also }{
\b\f1 Tarmenel}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab t\'e1ra}{\f1  "lofty" }{\i\f1 (SA:tar, LT1:264, T\'c2/TA3 (AYAK, T\'c1WAR) )}{\f1 , "tall, high" }{\i\f1 (WJ:417)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 taracu}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "ox" }{\i\f1 (LT2:347, GL:69)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab taran}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tarambo}{\f1  "buffet" }{\i\f1 (LT2:337)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Tarannon}{\f1  masc. name; ?"High-gift"? Or, if -}{\b\f1 annon}{\f1  is a Sindarin-influenced form of }{\b\f1 andon}{\f1  "great gate" rather than a masculinized form of }{\b\f1 anna}{\f1  "gift", "Lord of the Gate"??? }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{
\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 tarass\'eb}{\f1  ??? }{\i\f1 (Narqelion)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tarca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "horn"}{\i\f1  (TAR\'c1K)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tarcalion}{\f1  = }{\b\f1 Tar-Calion}{\f1 , Quenya name of Ar-Pharaz\'f4n }{\i\f1 (LR:47, SD:246)}{\f1 ; see }{\b\f1 Calion}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 Tarcil}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 masc. name, *"High-man", also used to mean N\'famen\'f3rean }{\i\f1 (Appendix A, TUR, KHIL)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab t\'e1r\'eb}{\f1  "in that day", not translated in its first occurrence in }{\i\f1 F\'edriel's Song}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Tareldar}{\f1  "High-elves" }{\i\f1 (MR:349)}{\f1 , sg. *}{\b\f1 Tarelda}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab t\'e1ri}{\f1  "queen", used especially of Varda }{\i\f1 (T\'c2/TA3, LT1:264)}{\f1 , etymologically "she that is high" }{\i\f1 (SA:tar)}{\f1 . Genitive }{\b\f1 t\'e1rio}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Elent\'e1ri}{\f1  "Starqueen", a title of Varda. (}{\i\f1 
Nam, RGEO:67)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Tarinya}{\f1  "my queen" }{\i\f1 (UT:179; sic, not *}{\b\i\f1 t\'e1rinya}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab t\'e1ri\'eb}{\f1  "height", allative }{\b\f1 t\'e1rienna}{\f1  "to [the] height" }{\i\f1 (LotR3:VI ch. 4, translated in Letters:308}{\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab T\'e1rion}{\f1  alternative name of }{\b\f1 Valanya}{\f1 , the last day of the Eldarin six-day week, dedicated to the Powers (Valar) }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tarma}{\f1  "pillar" }{\i\f1 (SA:tar)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Tarmasundar}{\f1  "the Roots of the Pillar", the slopes of Meneltarma in N\'famenor }{\i\f1 (UT:166)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Tarmenel}{\f1  "High Heaven" }{\i\f1 (LotR1:II ch. 1)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Tar-menel}{\f1  "the true firmament", as opposed to }{\b\f1 Nur-menel}{\f1  (q.v.) }{\i\f1 (MR:388)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 tarna}{\f1  "crossing, passage" }{\i\f1 (LT2:347)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Tarondor}{\f1  masc. name, *"Lord of Ondor (Gondor)" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Tarostar}{\f1  masc. name, *"Lord of }{\i\f1 ostar}{\f1  [?]" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tarquendi}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "High-elves" = Lindar (= the later }{\i\f1 Vanyar}{\f1 ; Tolkien revised the names) Sg. #}{\b\f1 tarquend\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (T\'c2/TA3)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tarquesta}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "high-speech" (that is Lindarin [later }{\i\f1 Vanyarin}{\f1 , Tolkien revised the names], or Qenya [Quenya]) }{\i\f1 (T\'c2/TA3)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 taru}{\f1  "horn" }{\i\f1 (LT2:337, 347; Tolkien's later Quenya has }{\b\i\f1 tarca}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 tarucca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "horned" }{\i\f1 (LT2:347)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 tarucco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "bull" (also }{\b\f1 tarunco}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 ("k") (LT2:347; Tolkien's later Quenya has }{\b\i\f1 mundo}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 Taructarna}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "Oxford" }{\i\f1 (LT2:347; this "Qenya" word would have to become }{\b\i\f1 Taruhtarna}{\i\f1  in LotR-style Quenya)}{\b\i\f1 
\par }{\f1 \tab *}{\b\f1 Taruhtarna}{\f1  see }{\b\f1 Taructarna}{\f1  
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tarunco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "bull" (also }{\b\f1 tarucco}{\f1 )}{\i\f1  ("k") (LT2:347; Tolkien's later Quenya has }{\b\i\f1 mundo}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tarya}{\f1  "tough, stiff"}{\i\f1  (T\'c1RAG)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tasar}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tasar\'eb}{\f1  "willow-tree" }{\i\f1 (TATHAR)}{\f1 . In }{\b\f1 Tasarinan}{\f1  *"Willow-valley", }{\b\f1 Nan-tasarion}{\f1  *"Valley of willows" }{\i\f1 (SA:tathar)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 tasarin}{\f1  "willow" }{\i\f1 (LT2:346; in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 tasar}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 tasar\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Tasarinan}{\i\f1  }{\f1 *"Willow-vale", also }{\b\f1 Nan-Tasarion}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (LotR2:III ch. 4)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 t\'e1ta}{\f1  "hat" }{\i\f1 (GL:71)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 tatya}{\f1  archaic ordinal "second". Nominal pl. }{\b\f1 Tatyar}{\f1  *"Seconds, Second 
Ones", the original name of the Noldor as the Second Clan of the Elves (or rather the direct Quenya descendant of the original name, that was probably *}{\i\f1 Tatj\'e2i}{\f1 ). }{\i\f1 (WJ:380)}{\f1  Later, }{\b\f1 tatya}{\f1 
 as an ordinal was replaced by }{\b\f1 att\'eba}{ }{\i (VT42:25)}{.}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab tatya}{\f1 - "to double" }{\i\f1 (TATA)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 taul\'eb}{\f1  "great tree" }{\i\f1 (LT1:267)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 tauno}{\f1  "forest" }{\i\f1 (LT1:267; in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 taur\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab taura}{\f1  "mighty" }{\i\f1 (TUR)}{\f1 , "very mighty, vast, of unmeasured might or size" }{\i\f1 (VT39:10) }{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab taur\'eb}{\f1  "(great) wood, forest" }{\i\f1 (SA:taur, Letters:308, T\'c1WAR. VT39:7)}{\f1 , pl. }{\b\f1 tauri}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Taur\'eb Huin\'e9va}{\f1  "Forest of Shadow", Sindarin }{\i\f1 Taur na Fuin}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (PHUY)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab }{\f1 #}{\b\f1 taur\'eba}{\f1  "forested" in }{\b\f1 Tumbaletaur\'eba}{\f1 , see }{\b\f1 Taurelil\'f3m\'eba-tumbalemorna}{\f1 ...
\par }{\b\f1 \tab taurelasselindon}{\f1  "like leaves of forests" }{\i\f1 (MC:213, 220; this is "Qenya") }{\b\f1 
\par \tab Taurelil\'f3m\'eba-tumbalemorna Tumbaletaur\'eba L\'f3m\'ebanor}{\f1 
 "Forestmanyshadowed-deepvalleyblack Deepvalleyforested Gloomyland", Quenya elements agglutinated in Entish fashion; this supposedly means something like "there is a black shadow in the deep dales of the forest" }{\i\f1 (LotR2:III ch. 4; translated in A
ppendix F under "Ents"; cf. also Letters:308)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Tauremorna}{\f1  place-name, *"Wood-black" }{\i\f1 (LotR2:III ch. 4)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 Tauremornal\'f3m\'eb}{\f1  place-name, *"Forest (of) Black Night" }{\i\f1 (LotR2:III ch. 4)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab taurina}{\f1  "of wood"}{\i\f1  (T\'c1WAR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tavar}{\f1  (1) "wood" }{\i\f1 (T\'c1WAR)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 tavar}{\f1  (2), pl. }{\b\f1 tavarni}{\f1 , "dale-sprites" }{\i\f1 (LT1:267; perhaps obsoleted by # 1 above)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Tavari}{\f1  (name of the "fays of the Woods" in early "Qenya"; see }{\i\f1 The Book of Lost Tales 1}{\f1  p. 267) }{\i\f1 (T\'c1WAR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tavaril}{\f1  "dryad, spirit of woods" (evidently fem.) }{\i\f1 (T\'c1WAR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tavaro}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tavaron}{\f1  "dryad, spirit of woods" (evidently masc.) }{\i\f1 (T\'c1WAR)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 tavas}{\f1  "woodland" }{\i\f1 (LT1:267)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tax\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("ks")}{\f1  "nail" }{\i\f1 (TAK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab te}{\f1  "them" }{\i\f1 (LotR3:VI ch. 4, translated in Letters:308}{\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab t\'eba}{\f1  (1) "straight line, road"}{\i\f1  (TE\'d1)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 t\'eba}{\f1  (2) "indicates" }{\i\f1 (evidently a present-tense stem)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (VT39:6)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab tec}{\f1 - "write" (Etym gives the form }{\b\f1 tec\'eb}{\b\i\f1  }{\f1 "writes", evidently the 3rd person aorist)}{\i\f1  (TEK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tecco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "stroke of pen or brush (\'b4) when not used as long mark" }{\i\f1 (TEK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tecil}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "pen" }{\i\f1 (TEK, PM:318)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tehta}{\f1  "mark, sign" (noun) }{\i\f1 (TEK, VT39:17, Appendix E)}{\f1 , especially diacritics denoting vowels in F\'ebanorian writing (pl. }{\b\f1 tehtar}{\f1  is attested); these diacritics are explicitly called }{\b\f1 \'f3matehtar}{\f1 
 "vowel-marks", q.v.
\par \tab }{\b\f1 tel}{\f1  "roof" }{\i\f1 (LT1:268)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab telco}{\f1  "stem" }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 . The }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1  gives }{\b\f1 telco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  pl.}{\b\f1  telqui}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "leg" (the pl. form is said to be analogical) }{\i\f1 (T\'c9LEK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Telcontar}{\f1  "Strider" }{\i\f1 (MR:216)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab telda}{\f1  (1) "last, final" }{\i\f1 (WJ:407)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 telda}{\f1  (2) "having a roof" }{\i\f1 (LT1:268, LT2:348; this "Qenya" word is evidently obsoleted by # 1 above)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tel\'eb}{\f1 - "finish, end" (intransitive), also "be the last thing or person in a series or sequence of events" }{\i\f1 (WJ:411; }{\b\i\f1 tel\'eb}{\i\f1  may be taken as the 3rd person aorist of a stem }{\b\i\f1 tel}{\i\f1 -)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 telella}{\f1  adj. corresponding to }{\b\f1 Telell\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (LT1:267)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 Telell\'eb}{\f1  "little elf" (also }{\b\f1 Teler}{\f1 ); the }{\b\f1 Telelli}{\f1  are said to be "young Elves of all clans who dwelt in K\'f4r to perfect their arts of singing and poetry" }{\i\f1 (LT1:267; see }{\b\i\f1 Teler}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 

\par }{\b\f1 \tab Telelli\'eb}{\f1  "Teler-folk" }{\i\f1 (TELES)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Telemmait\'eb}{\f1  masc. name, *"Silver-handed" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab telemna}{\f1  "of silver" }{\i\f1 (KYELEP/TELEP)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Telemnar}{\f1  masc.name, "Silver-flame" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A; for *Telep-nar)
\par }{\f1 telemp\'eb "silver" }{\i\f1 (LT1:268; in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 telp\'eb}{\i\f1 , which is actually also found in early "Qenya")}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab telep}{\f1 - see }{\b\f1 telp\'eb}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab telepsa}{\f1  "of silver" }{\i\f1 (KYELEP/TELEP)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 telepta}{\f1  "silver", as adj? }{\i\f1 (LT2:347 - rather }{\b\i\f1 telemna}{\i\f1  in Tolkien's later Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Teler}{\f1  "sea-elf", pl. }{\b\f1 Teleri}{\f1 , general (partitive) pl. }{\b\f1 Telelli}{\f1 , the third tribe of the Eldar }{\i\f1 (TELES (MIS) )}{\f1 , also called }{\i\f1 Lindar}{\f1 .}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 Teleri}{\f1 
 means "those at the end of the line, the hindmost", }{\i\f1 (WJ:382 cf. 371)}{\f1 , derived from the stem }{\i\f1 tel}{\f1 - "finish, end, be last" }{\i\f1 (SA:tel-)}{\f1 . The Lindar were so called because they lagged behind on the march from Cuivi\'e9
nen. In early "Qenya", }{\b\f1 Teler}{\f1 , also }{\b\f1 Telell\'eb}{\f1 , was defined "little elf" (LT1:267), but this is certainly not a valid gloss in Tolkien's later Quenya.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab teler\'eba}{\f1  adj. corresponding to }{\b\f1 Teler}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (LT1:267; perhaps rather }{\b\i\f1 Telerin}{\i\f1  in Tolkien's later Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Telerin}{\f1  "Telerian"}{\i\f1  (TELES)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab telerinwa}{\f1  Telerin (paraphrased "of the Shores of Elfland" in MC:215, since the Teleri dwelt on the shores of the Blessed Realm.) }{\i\f1 (MC:216; this is "Qenya")}{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 Telimbectar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "Orion", lit. "Swordsman of Heaven". Also }{\b\f1 Telimectar }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (LT1:268; in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 Telumehtar}{\i\f1 , q.v. The combination }{\b\i\f1 ct}{\i\f1 
 is not found in LotR-style Quenya.)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 telimbo}{\f1  "canopy, sky" }{\i\f1 (LT1:268)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Telimectar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "Orion", lit. "Swordsman of Heaven". Also }{\b\f1 Telimbectar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (LT1:268; in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 Telumehtar}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tella}{\f1  "hindmost, last"}{\i\f1  (TELES)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tell\'eb}{\f1  "rear"}{\i\f1  (TELES)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab telluma}{\f1  "dome, copula", especially the "Dome of Varda" over Valinor, but also applied to the domes of the mansion of Manw\'eb and Varda upon Taniquetil. Adopted from Valarin }{\i\f1 delg\'fbm\'e2 }{\f1 
under the influence of pure Quenya }{\b\f1 telum\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ:399, 411). }{\f1 Pl. }{\b\f1 tellumar}{\f1  is attested }{\i\f1 (Nam, RGEO:66)}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab telma}{\f1  "a conclusion, anything used to finish off a work or affair", often applied to the last item in a structure, such as a coping-stone, or a topmost pinnacle }{\i\f1 (WJ:411)}{\f1 . In the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1 , the word }{\b\f1 
telma}{\f1  seems to mean "base" or "bottom", allative }{\b\f1 telmanna}{\f1  in the phrase }{\b\f1 telmello telmanna}{\f1  "from hood to base, from crown to foot, top to bottom".}{\i\f1  (TEL/TELU)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab telm\'eb}{\f1  "hood, covering"; ablative in the phrase }{\b\f1 telmello telmanna}{\f1  "from hood to base, from crown to foot, top to bottom"}{\i\f1  (TEL/TELU)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab telp\'eb}{\f1  "silver", }{\b\f1 telep}{\f1 - in some compounds like }{\b\f1 Teleporno}{\f1 ; assimilated }{\b\f1 telem}{\f1 - in }{\b\f1 Telemnar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (KYELEP/TELEP, SA:celeb, LT1:255, 268; also }{\b\i\f1 tyelp\'eb}{\i\f1 , }{
\b\i\f1 telep}{\i\f1 -, UT:266)}{\f1 . The true Quenya descendant of primitive *}{\i\f1 kyelep\'ea}{\f1  is }{\b\f1 tyelp\'eb}{\f1 , but the Telerin form }{\b\f1 telp\'eb}{\f1 
 was more common, "for the Teleri prized silver above gold, and their skill as silversmiths was esteemed even by the Noldor" }{\i\f1 (UT:266)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Telperion}{\f1  the White Tree of Valinor; }{\b\f1 Telperien}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("Telperi\'ebn")}{\f1 
, fem. name including }{\b\f1 telp}{\f1 - "silver" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Telperinquar}{\f1  "Silver-fist, Celebrimbor" }{\i\f1 (SA:celeb - also }{\b\i\f1 Tyelperinquar}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Telporno}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Teleporno}{\f1 
 "Silver-high" = Sindarin }{\i\f1 Celeborn}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Letters:347, UT:266). }{\f1 It seems that }{\b\f1 Teleporno}{\f1  is properly Telerin, Quenyarized as }{\b\f1 Telporno}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab telpina}{\f1  "of silver" }{\i\f1 (KYELEP/TELEP)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab telqui}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  (analogical) pl. of }{\b\i\f1 telco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (T\'c9LEK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab telta}{\f1 - "to canopy, overshadow, screen" }{\i\f1 (TEL/TELU)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 teltass\'eb}{\f1  "awning" }{\i\f1 (GL:70)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Telufinw\'eb}{\f1  "Last Finw\'eb", masc. name; he was called }{\i\f1 Amras}{\f1  in Sindarin. Short Quenya name }{\b\f1 Telvo}{\i\f1 . (PM:353)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab telum\'eb}{\f1  "dome, roof, canopy" }{\i\f1 (TEL/TELU, WJ:411 cf. 399; see also }{\b\i\f1 telluma}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 ; "firmament" }{\i\f1 (MC:214)}{\f1 , inflected}{\b\f1  telumen }{\f1 in MC:221 }{\i\f1 (the latter is "Qenya")}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 
Telumehtar}{\f1  "warrior of the sky", older name of }{\b\f1 Menelmacar}{\f1  = Orion }{\i\f1 (Appendix E, TEL/TELU, WJ:411)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Telumendil}{\f1  *"Sky-friend", name of a constellation }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab telya}{\f1 - "finish, wind up, conclude" (transitive) }{\i\f1 (WJ:411)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab t\'e9ma}{\f1  "row, series, line" (pl. }{\b\f1 t\'e9mar}{\f1  attested) }{\i\f1 (TE\'d1, Appendix E)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ten}{\f1  "for", in }{\i\f1 F\'edriel's Song}{\f1 ; apparently replaced by }{\b\f1 an}{\f1  in LotR-style Quenya.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ten}{\f1 - "hear", future tense }{\b\f1 tenuva}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (MC:213; in Tolkien's later Quenya, "hear" is }{\b\i\f1 hlar}{\i\f1 -)}{\b\f1 
\par \tab t\'e9na}{\f1  "straight, right" }{\i\f1 (SD:310; see }{\b\i\f1 t\'e9ra}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tencel\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "writing system, spelling" }{\i\f1 (TEK)
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 teng\'eb}{\f1  "indicated", pa.t. of }{\b\f1 t\'eba}{\f1 ? }{\i\f1 (VT39:6)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab tengwa}{\f1  (pl. }{\b\f1 tengwar}{\f1  is attested) "letter", }{\b\f1 tengwa}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (\'f1)}{\f1  "any one visible sign representing (theoretically) any one audible }{\i\f1 te\'f1gwe}{\f1 
" (phoneme) }{\i\f1 (VT39:17)}{\f1 . In non-technical usage }{\b\f1 tengwa}{\f1  was equivalent to "consonant", since only the consonants were full signs }{\i\f1 (WJ:396, TEK)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tengwanda}{\f1  "alphabet" }{\i\f1 (TEK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tengw\'eb}{\f1  (pl. }{\b\f1 tengwi}{\f1  attested) "indication, sign, token", in linguistics used for }{\i\f1 phonemes}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (VT39:7, WJ:394)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 hlon\'edti tengwi}{\f1  "phonetic signs" }{\i\f1 (WJ:395).}{\f1  The term }{
\b\f1 tengw\'eb}{\f1  was particularly associated with consonants }{\i\f1 (VT39:16)}{\f1 . In the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1 , stem }{\i\f1 TEK}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tengw\'eb}{\f1  is glossed "writing"; this gloss would seem to be obsoleted (use }{\b\f1 sarm\'eb}
{\f1 ).
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 tengwel\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("e")}{\f1  "Language" (in all its aspects), a general word for the grouping and composing of }{\i\f1 tengwi}{\f1  (linguistic "signs", phonemes) into a linguistic system }{
\i\f1 (VT39:16)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab tengwesta}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("\'f1")}{\f1  "a system or code of signs", "Language", referring particularly to structure, including morphology and grammar }{\i\f1 (VT39:15)}{\f1 
. As a technical term for "language", this includes languages not made up of sounds }{\i\f1 (WJ:394)}{\f1 , but usually it means "spoken language" when unqualified }{\i\f1 (WJ:395)}{\f1 . In the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tengwesta}{\f1 
 is glossed "grammar" }{\i\f1 (TEK)}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tengwesti\'eb}{\f1  "Language" as abstract or phenomenon }{\i\f1 (WJ:394)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tenna}{\f1  "until, up to, as far as" (CO), elided }{\b\f1 tenn'}{\f1  in the phrase }{\b\f1 tenn' Ambar-metta}{\f1  "until the end of the world" in EO, because the next word begins in a similar vowel; }{\b\f1 tennoio}{\f1  "for ever" (}{
\b\f1 tenna}{\f1  + }{\b\f1 oio}{\f1 , q.v.)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ter}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 ter\'eb}{\f1  "through" }{\i\f1 (Notes on CO, UT:317, TER/TERES, Narqelion)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab t\'e9ra}{\f1  "straight, right" }{\i\f1 (TE\'d1, see TE3; LR:47; in one text Tolkien changed it to }{\b\i\f1 t\'e9na}{\i\f1 , SD:310)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 terc\'e1no}{\f1  "herald" }{\i\f1 (PM:362)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tercen}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("terken")}{\f1  "insight", literally *"through-sight" }{\i\f1 (MR:471)}{\f1 ; adj. #}{\b\f1 tercenya}{\f1  (only pl. }{\b\f1 terceny\'eb}{\f1  attested) "of insight"; }{\b\f1 essi terceny\'eb}{\f1  
"names of insight", names given to a child by its mother, indicating some dominant feature of its nature as perceived by her }{\i\f1 (MR:216)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab teren}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 teren\'eb}{\f1  "slender" }{\i\f1 (TER/TERES)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Terendul}{\f1  "Slender-(and)-dark", masc. name }{\i\f1 (LR:59, TER/TERES, DUL, NDUL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab teret}{\f1  "auger, gimlet" }{\i\f1 (LT1:255)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tereva}{\f1  "fine, acute" }{\i\f1 (TER/TERES)}{\f1 , "piercing"}{\i\f1  (LT1:255; glossed "fine, acute" in the }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1 , but the stem }{\b\i\f1 TER}{\i\f1  is defined as "pierce")}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab terhat}{\f1 - "break apart" }{\i\f1 (SKAT)}{\f1 , past tense }{\b\f1 terhant\'eb}{\f1  "broke" }{\i\f1 (LR:47/56}{\f1 )}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab termar}{\f1 - "stand" meaning }{\i\f1 last}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 ter-mar}{\f1 - "through-abide"); future tense }{\b\f1 termaruva}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 CO}{\f1 .
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 tes}{\f1  ending for dual "respective" }{\i\f1 (Plotz)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 tev\'eb}{\f1 - "to hate" }{\i\f1 (LT1:268; in Tolkien's later Quenya, }{\b\i\f1 tev\'eb}{\i\f1  may be understood as the 3rd person aorist)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 tevi\'eb}{\f1  "hatred" }{\i\f1 (LT1:268)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tevin}{\f1  "hated" }{\i\f1 (QL:90, not to be glossed "hatred" as in LT1:268)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Thauron}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'deauron}{\f1 ) earlier form of }{\b\f1 Sauron}{\f1 , before the change }{\b\f1 th}{\f1  > }{\b\f1 s}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (SA:thaur, cf. Letters:380, which suggests a stem }{\b\i\f1 thaurond}{\i\f1 
-, there spelt with the Greek letter for }{\b\i\f1 th}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab thelma}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'deelma}{\f1 ) see *}{\b\f1 selma}{\b\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Therind\'eb}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'deerind\'eb}{\f1 ) "Needlewoman", original form of }{\b\f1 Serind\'eb}{\f1 , before the shift }{\b\f1 th}{\f1  > }{\b\f1 s}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (PM:333)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab thind\'eb}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'deind\'eb}{\f1 ) older form of }{\b\f1 sind\'eb}{\f1 , q.v., preserved in Vanyarin }{\i\f1 (WJ:384, there spelt with the special letter }{\b\i\f1 \'de}{\i\f1 , not the digraph }{\b\i\f1 th}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Thindicollo}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'deindicollo}{\f1 ) original form of }{\b\f1 Sindicollo}{\f1 , before the shift }{\b\f1 th}{\f1  > }{\b\f1 s}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (PM:337, there spelt with the special letter }{\b\i\f1 \'de}{\i\f1 , not the digraph }{
\b\i\f1 th}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab thorno}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'deorno}{\f1 ) archaic/Vanyarin form of }{\b\f1 sorno}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Letters:427)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab th\'fal\'eb}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'de\'fal\'eb}{\f1 ) see }{\b\f1 s\'fal\'eb}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ti\'eb}{\f1  "path, course, line, direction, way" }{\i\f1 (TE3)}{\f1 ; pl. }{\b\f1 tier }{\f1 in }{\i\f1 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Nam, RGEO:67)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 tielyanna}{\f1  "upon your path" }{\i\f1 (UT:22 cf. 51; }{\b\i\f1 tie-lya-nna}{
\i\f1  "path-your-upon")
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tihta}{\f1 - "blink, peer", participle }{\b\f1 tihtala}{\f1  in an earlier variant of }{\i\f1 Markirya
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tild\'eb}{\f1  "point, horn" }{\i\f1 (TIL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Tilion}{\f1  "the Horned", name of a Maia, steersman of the Moon }{\i\f1 (SA:til; according to the }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1 , stem TIL, }{\b\i\f1 Tilion}{\i\f1  is a name of the "man in the Moon")
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 timp\'eb}{\f1  "fine rain" }{\i\f1 (LT1:268, Narqelion)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 timpin\'eb}{\f1  "spray" }{\i\f1 (LT1:268)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 timpinen}{\f1  "a fluter" }{\i\f1 (LT1:268; hardly valid in Tolkien's later Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tin}{\f1 - "glint" (3rd pers. aorist }{\b\f1 tin\'eb}{\f1  "it glints") }{\i\f1 (TIN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tinco}{\f1  "metal" }{\i\f1 (TINK\'d4)}{\f1 , also name of tengwa 1 }{\i\f1 (Appendix E, there spelt "tinco", but "tinko" in Etym)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 tincot\'e9ma}{\f1  "}{\i\f1 t}{\f1 -series", dental series,  first column of the Tengwar system 
}{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tinda}{\f1  (1) "glinting, silver" (adj.) }{\i\f1 (TIN)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 tinda}{\f1  (2) "spike" }{\i\f1 (LT1:258; probably obsoleted by # 1 above)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tind\'eb}{\f1  "glint" (noun) }{\i\f1 (TIN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tind\'f3m\'eb}{\f1  "starry twilight, starlit dusk" }{\i\f1 (DOMO, TIN, SA:tin)}{\f1 , usually of the time near dawn, not near evening }{\i\f1 (SA:tin)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tind\'f3merel}{\f1  (also capitalized }{\b\f1 Tind\'f3merel}{\f1 ) "daughter of twilight", a kenning (poetic name) of the nightingale; = Sindarin }{\i\f1 Tin\'faviel}{\f1 .}{\i\f1  (TIN, SEL-D, SA:tin)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tindon}{\f1  "lay" (???) }{\i\f1 (MC:220; this is "Qenya")}{\b\f1 
\par \tab t\'edn\'eb}{\f1  "shining" }{\i\f1 (MC:213; this is "Qenya") }{\b\f1 
\par \tab tinga}{\f1 - (not glossed, evidently meaning *"to twang, make a twang") }{\i\f1 (TING/TANG)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ting\'eb}{\f1  "twang" }{\i\f1 (TING/TANG)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tingilind\'eb}{\f1  "a twinkling star" }{\i\f1 (TIN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tingilya}{\f1  "a twinkling star" }{\i\f1 (TIN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tinta}{\f1 - "kindle, cause to sparkle", cf. }{\b\f1 Tintall\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (TIN, SA:tin, MR:388)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Tintall\'eb}{\f1  "Kindler", a title of Varda who kindled the stars }{\i\f1 (TIN, Nam, RGEO:67)}{\f1 . From }{\b\f1 tinta}{\f1 - "kindle, make to sparkle" }{\i\f1 (MR:388)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Tintani\'eb}{\f1  "Kindler" = Varda }{\i\f1 (TIN; }{\b\i\f1 Tint\'e1ni\'eb}{\i\f1  under TAN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tintila}{\f1 - "twinkle", present pl. }{\b\f1 tintilar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Nam, RGEO:67)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tintina}{\f1 - "sparkle" (actually glossed "it sparkles") }{\i\f1 (TIN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tinw\'eb}{\f1  "sparkle", also "star"; pl. }{\b\f1 tinwi}{\f1  "sparks", properly used of the star-imagines on }{\b\f1 Nur-menel}{\f1  (q.v.). Cf. }{\b\f1 nill\'eb}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (TIN, MR:388)}{\f1  In early "Qenya", }{\b\f1 tinw\'eb}{\f1 
 was simply glossed "star" }{\i\f1 (LT1:269, cf. MC:214)}{\f1 . In one late source, the meaning of }{\b\f1 tinw\'eb}{\f1  is given as "spark", and it is said that this word (like Sindarin }{\i\f1 gil}{\f1 ) was used of the stars of heaven }{
"in place of the older and more elevated }{\i el}{, }{\i elen}{- stem" }{\i (VT42:11)}{.}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 tinwelindon }{\f1 "like stars" }{\i\f1 (MC:213, MC:220; this is a "Qenya" "similative" form in -}{\b\i\f1 ndon}{\i\f1  and pl. in -}{\b\i\f1 li}{\i\f1 )}{\b\f1 
\par \tab Tinwer\'edna}{\f1  (name)}{\i\f1  (RIG)
\par }{\f1 \tab [}{\b\f1 Tinwerontar}{\f1 ] "star-queen, title of Varda" }{\i\f1 (TIN, T\'c2/TA3)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 
\par }{\f1 \tab [}{\b\f1 Tinwetar}{\f1 ] "star-queen, Queen of Stars", title of Varda }{\i\f1 (TIN, T\'c2/TA3)}{\b\f1  }{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tir}{\f1 - "watch, watch over, guard, heed", 1st pers. aorist }{\b\f1 tirin}{\f1  "I watch", pa.t. }{\b\f1 tirn\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (TIR)}{\f1 , future tense }{\b\f1 tiruva}{\f1  "shall heed" in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 
 (also MC:213, 214); also in }{\i\f1 CO}{\f1  with pronominal endings: }{\b\f1 tiruvantes}{\f1  "they will guard it" (}{\b\f1 tir-uva-nte-s}{\f1  "guard-will-they-it"). The stem also occurs in }{\b\f1 palant\'edri}{\f1  (q.v.), }{\b\f1 Tirion}{\f1 
 "Great Watchtower", a city of the Elves }{\i\f1 (SA:tir; in MR:176 the translation is "Watchful City")
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 tirin}{\f1  "tall tower" }{\i\f1 (LT1:258; this is a verb "I watch" in the }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1 , stem }{\b\i\f1 TIR}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 tirion}{\f1  "watch-tower, tower" }{\i\f1 (TIR)}{\f1 ; in early "Qenya" the gloss was "a mighty tower, a city on a hill" }{\i\f1 (LT1:258)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Tirion}{\f1  "Great Watchtower",
 a city of the Elves }{\i\f1 (SA:tir; in MR:176 the translation is "Watchful City")
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 tirios}{\f1  "a town with walls and towers" }{\i\f1 (LT1:258)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 tiris}{\f1  "watch, vigil" }{\i\f1 (LT1:258)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab titta}{\f1  "little, tiny" }{\i\f1 (TIT)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tiuca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "thick, fat" }{\i\f1 (TIW)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tiuco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "thigh" }{\i\f1 (TIW)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tiuya}{\f1 - "swell, grow fat" }{\i\f1 (TIW)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tix\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("ks")}{\f1  "dot, tiny mark, point" }{\i\f1 (TIK)}{\f1 
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 to}{\f1  ending for dual genitive }{\i\f1 (Plotz)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab t\'f3}{\f1  "wool" }{\i\f1 (TOW)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 toa}{\f1  (1) }{\i\f1 ("t\'f6a")}{\f1  noun "wood" }{\i\f1 (VT39:6)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab toa}{\f1  (2) adj. "of wool, woollen" }{\i\f1 (TOW; in GL:71 }{\b\i\f1 toa}{\i\f1  was glossed "wool", noun instead of adjective - but in Tolkien's later Quenya, the noun is }{\b\i\f1 t\'f3}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab toi}{\f1  "they" }{\i\f1 (FS; replaced by }{\b\i\f1 te}{\i\f1  in LotR-style Quenya?)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tol}{\f1  "island, isle" (rising with sheer sides from the sea or from the river, }{\i\f1 SA:tol}{\f1 ). In early "Qenya", the word was defined as "island, any rise standing alone in water, plain of green, etc" }{\i\f1 (LT1:269).}{\f1 
 The stem is }{\b\f1 toll}{\f1 -; the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1  as published in LR gives the pl. }{\b\f1 toll\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (TOL}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 , probably a misreading for }{\b\f1 tolli}{\f1 , as in LT1:85.
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 told\'eba}{\f1  "eighth" (VT42:25), also }{\b tolt\'eba}{ (VT42:31). See }{\b tolto}{.}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Tol Eress\'eba}{\f1  "Lonely Isle" }{\i\f1 (LONO, Silm)}{\f1 , also spelt }{\b\f1 Tol-Eress\'eba}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (ERE)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Tol-eress\'eba}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (TOL}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 t\'f3l\'eb}{\f1  "centre" }{\i\f1 (LT1:269; the word }{\b\i\f1 end\'eb}{\i\f1  in to be preferred in Tolkien's later Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tollalinta}{\f1  "upon hills" }{\i\f1 (MC:214; this is "Qenya") }{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tollanta}{\f1  "upon top(s?)" }{\i\f1 (MC:221; this is "Qenya")}{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 tolmen}{\f1  "boss (of shield)" }{\i\f1 (LT1:269)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 tolos}{\f1  "knob, lump" }{\i\f1 (LT1:269)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 tolt\'eba}{\f1  "eighth" (VT42:31), also }{\b told\'eba}{ (VT42:25). See }{\b tolto}{.}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 tolto}{\f1  "eight" }{\i\f1 (TOL}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 -OTH/OT)}{\f1 ; }{\b tolt\'eba}{ ordinal "eighth" (VT42:31, also }{\b told\'eba}{, VT42:25 \endash  the latter form probably presupposes *}{\b toldo}{ as the cardinal "eight").}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 tombo}{\f1  "gong" }{\i\f1 (LT1:269)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tomp\'eb}{\f1  pa.t. of }{\b\i\f1 top}{\i\f1 - }{\f1 (}{\b\i\f1 top\'eb}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (TOP)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab top}{\f1 - "cover" (1st pers. aorist }{\b\f1 top\'eb}{\f1  "covers"), pa.t. }{\b\f1 tomp\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (TOP)}{\f1 . Variant }{\b\f1 tup}{\f1 -, q.v.}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab t\'f3pa}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 t\'f3pa}{\f1 - "roof" }{\i\f1 (noun and verb) (TOP)
\par }{\f1 \tab [}{\b\f1 Tormen}{\f1 ] "north" }{\i\f1 (MEN; replaced by }{\b\i\f1 Formen}{\i\f1 , q.v.)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab torni}{\f1  pl. of }{\b\i\f1 toron}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (TOR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab toron}{\f1  pl. }{\b\f1 torni}{\f1  "brother" }{\i\f1 (TOR)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 torwa}{\f1  ??? }{\i\f1 (Narqelion)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tuc}{\f1 -}{\i\f1  ("k")}{\f1  "draw" (1st pers. aorist }{\b\f1 tucin}{\f1  "I draw") }{\i\f1 (TUK)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 tucalia}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 ??? }{\i\f1 (Narqelion)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tuia}{\f1 - "sprout, spring" (Tolkien's gloss is actually "sprouts, springs", since this is also the 3rd pers. sg. present tense) }{\i\f1 (TUY)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tuil\'eb}{\f1  "spring, spring-time", also used = "dayspring, early morn" }{\i\f1 (VT39:7, TUY)}{\f1 , in the calendar of Imladris a precisely defined period of 54 days, but also used without any exact definition. Cf. }{\b\f1 tuil\'e9r\'eb}{
\f1 , q.v. }{\i\f1 (Appendix D) }{\f1 - In early "Qenya", the word }{\b\f1 tuil\'eb}{\f1  is glossed "Spring", but it is said that it literally refers to a "budding", also used collectively for "buds, new shoots, fresh green" }{\i\f1 (LT1:269)}{\f1 . Cf. 
}{\b\f1 tuima}{\f1  in Tolkien's later Quenya.}{\i\f1 
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 tuil\'e9r\'eb}{\f1  *"Spring-day", a day outside the months in the Steward's Reckoning, inserted between }{\b\f1 S\'falim\'eb}{\f1  and }{\b\f1 V\'edress\'eb}{\f1  (March and April). In early "Qenya", }{\b\f1 Tuil\'e9r\'eb}{\f1 
 was simply glossed "Spring" }{\i\f1 (LT1:269)}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tuilindo}{\f1  "swallow", etymologically "spring-singer" }{\i\f1 (TUY, LIN}{\i\f1\super 2}{\i\f1 , LT1:269, LT2:338)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tuima}{\f1  "sprout, bud" (noun) }{\i\f1 (TUY)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tul}{\f1 - "come" }{\i\f1 (WJ:368)}{\f1 , 1st pers. aorist }{\b\f1 tulin}{\f1  "I come" }{\i\f1 (TUL)}{\f1 , perfect }{\b\f1 ut\'fali\'eb}{\f1  "has come" (}{\b\f1 ut\'falien}{\f1  "I am come", }{\i\f1 EO}{\f1 ), }{\b\f1 ut\'falie'n aur\'eb}{
\f1  "Day has come" (the function of the }{\b\f1 'n}{\f1  is unclear; it may simply be inserted for euphony). Past tense }{\b\f1 t\'fal\'eb}{\f1  "came" in LR:47 and SD:246; read perhaps *}{\b\f1 tull\'eb}{\f1 
 in LotR-style Quenya. Cf. early "Qenya" perfects }{\b\f1 tulielto}{\f1  "they have come" }{\i\f1 (LT1:114, 270)}{\f1  and }{\b\f1 tulier }{\f1 "have come", pl., in the phrase }{\b\f1 I\'b7Eldar tulier}{\f1  "the Eldar have come"}{\i\f1 (LT1:114, 270)}{
\f1 . Read probably *}{\b\f1 ut\'falient\'eb}{\f1 , *}{\b\f1 Eldar ut\'falier}{\f1  in LotR-style Quenya.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tulca}{\f1  (1) }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "firm, strong, immovable, steadfast" }{\i\f1 (TULUK)}{\f1 . Early "Qenya" also has a verb }{\b\f1 tulca}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "fix, set up, establish" }{\i\f1 (LT1:270)}{\f1 
; this word may still be valid in LotR-style Quenya.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tulca}{\f1  (2) }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "yellow". Adopted and adapted from Valarin. }{\i\f1 (WJ:399)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tulco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "support, prop" }{\i\f1 (TULUK)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 Tulkas}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 Tulkass}{\f1 -, as in dat.sg. }{\b\f1 Tulkassen}{\f1 ) name of a Vala, adopted and adapted from Valarin }{\i\f1 (WJ:399, TULUK)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 tulma}{\f1  "bier" }{\i\f1 (LT1:270)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tulta}{\f1 - "send for, fetch, summon" }{\i\f1 (TUL)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 tulu}{\f1 - "fetch, bring, bear; move, come" }{\i\f1 (LT1:270; probably obsoleted by }{\b\i\f1 tulta}{\i\f1 - in Tolkien's later Quenya)}{\f1  
\par \tab }{\b\f1 tulunca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "steady, firm" }{\i\f1 (LT1:270; in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 tulca}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 tulw\'eb}{\f1  "pillar, standard, pole" }{\i\f1 (LT1:270)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab t\'fama}{\f1  "moving" }{\i\f1 (MC:214; this is "Qenya") }{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tumba}{\f1  "deep valley" }{\i\f1 (Letters:308; SA:tum and TUB gives }{\b\i\f1 tumbo}{\i\f1  "valley, deep valley")}{\f1 ; apparently an extended form *}{\b\f1 tumbal\'eb}{\f1  in }{\b\f1 tumbalemorna}{\f1  "deepvalleyblack" or (according to 
}{\i\f1 SA:tum}{\f1 ) "black deep valley", also }{\b\f1 tumbaletaur\'eba}{\f1  "deepvalleyforested"; see }{\b\f1 Taurelil\'f3m\'eba-tumbalemorna}{\f1 ... 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 tumb\'eb}{\f1  "trumpet" }{\i\f1 (LT1:269)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 tumbo}{\f1  "(deep) valley", under or among hills }{\i\f1 (TUB, SA:tum)}{\f1 . In early "Qenya", the gloss was "dark vale" }{\i\f1 (LT1:269)}{\f1 . See }{\b\f1 tumba}{\f1 .
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab Tumbolatsin}{\f1  (place-name, apparently incorporating }{\b\f1 tumbo}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (LAT)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 tumna}{\f1  "lowlying, deep, low" }{\i\f1 (TUB)}{\f1 ; early "Qenya" glosses: "deep, profound, dark or hidden" }{\i\f1 (LT1:269, 271) 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tumpo}{\f1  "hump" }{\i\f1 (TUMPU)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab T\'fana}{\f1  (also }{\b\f1 T\'fan}{\f1 ) name of the hill on which Tirion was built }{\i\f1 (Silm, TUN, KOR)}{\f1 , derived from a stem (}{\i\f1 TUN}{\f1 ) apparently meaning simply *"hill, mound".
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tunda}{\f1  "tall" }{\i\f1 (TUN)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 tunda}{\f1 - "kindle" }{\i\f1 (LT1:270; rather }{\b\i\f1 tinta}{\i\f1 - in Tolkien's later Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tundo}{\f1  "hill, mound" }{\i\f1 (TUN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tunga}{\f1  "taut, tight" (of strings:) "resonant" }{\i\f1 (TUG)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tuo}{\f1  "muscle, sinew, vigour, physical strength" }{\i\f1 (TUG)
\par }{\f1 \tab #}{\b\f1 tup}{\f1 - "cover", isolated from }{\b\f1 unt\'fapa}{\f1 , q.v. Variant }{\b\f1 top}{\f1 - in the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tups\'eb}{\f1  "thatch" }{\i\f1 (TUP)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tur}{\f1 - "wield, control, govern" (1st pers. aorist }{\b\f1 turin}{\f1  "I wield" etc.), pa.t. }{\b\f1 turn\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (TUR)
\par }{\b\f1 Turambar}{\f1  masc. name, "Master of Doom/Fate", name taken in pride by T\'farin }{\i\f1 (Appendix A, SA:tur, TUR, MBARAT)
\par \tab }{\b\f1 tur}{\f1  "king" }{\i\f1 (LT1:260)}{\f1 ; rather }{\b\f1 aran}{\f1  in LotR-style Quenya, but cf. the verb }{\b\f1 tur}{\f1 -.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Turcafinw\'eb }{\f1 "strong, powerful (in body) Finw\'eb", masc. name; he was called }{\i\f1 Celegorm}{\f1  in Sindarin. Short Quenya name }{\b\f1 Turco}{\i\f1 . (PM:352)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Turcil}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (= Tarcil?)}{\f1  "N\'famen\'f3rean" }{\i\f1 (TUR)}{\f1 , stem }{\b\f1 turcild}{\f1 - as in pl.}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 turcildi}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (LR:47, 56; SD:246)}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Turco}{\f1  see }{\b\f1 Turcafinw\'eb
\par \tab t\'far\'eb}{\f1  "mastery, victory" }{\i\f1 (TUR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab T\'farin}{\f1  (masc. name), apparently meaning "victory-mood" (LR:395, stem TUR). The }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1  gives }{\b\f1 Turindo}{\f1  as the Quenya form of this name; }{\b\f1 T\'farin}{\f1 
 seems to be properly the Sindarin form, though it fits Quenya style well enough and Nienor used it in a Quenya sentence (near the end of ch. 21 in the }{\i\f1 Silmarillion}{\f1 )}{\b\f1 
\par \tab Turindo}{\f1  (masc. name, see }{\b\f1 T\'farin}{\f1 ). }{\i\f1 (TUR)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 turinqui}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "queen" }{\i\f1 (LT1:260; apparently the fem. of }{\b\i\f1 tur}{\i\f1 . In Tolkien's later Quenya, "queen" is }{\b\i\f1 t\'e1ri}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab turma}{\f1  "shield" }{\i\f1 (TUR\'daM)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab turn\'eb}{\f1  pa.t. of }{\b\i\f1 tur}{\i\f1 -}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (TUR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab T\'farosto}{\f1  "Gabilgathol", a dwelling of the Dwarves (Sindarin }{\i\f1 Belegost}{\f1 ; the names mean "Mickleburg", "Great Fortress")
\par \tab }{\b\f1 turu}{\f1  "wood" (properly firewood, but used of wood in general) }{\i\f1 (LT1:270)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 turu}{\f1 - "kindle" }{\i\f1 (LT1:270; rather }{\b\i\f1 tinta}{\i\f1 - in LotR-style Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Turuc\'e1no}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("-k\'e1no")}{\f1  "Turgon" }{\i\f1 (PM:344)
\par }{\f1 \tab [}{\b\f1 Turumbar}{\f1 ] (masc.name) }{\i\f1 (MBARAT) Changed by Tolkien to Turambar}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab #tur\'fana}{\f1  "mastered", only attested attested in the elided form }{\b\f1 tur\'fan'}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (UT:138, apparently incomplete spelling }{\b\i\f1 turun}{\i\f1  in Silm ch. 21)}{\f1 
. The form must be understood as the past participle of }{\b\f1 tur}{\f1 - "wield, control, govern", though we would normally expect *}{\b\f1 t\'farina}{\f1  or *}{\b\f1 turna}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tur\'fava}{\f1  "wooden" }{\i\f1 (LT1:270)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tussa}{\f1  "bush" }{\i\f1 (TUS)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tustur\'eb}{\f1  "tinder" }{\i\f1 (LT1:270)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab #tuv}{\f1 - "find", perfect }{\b\f1 ut\'favi\'eb}{\f1  "has found" in Aragorn's exclamation when he found the sapling of the White Tree: }{\b\f1 ut\'favienyes}{\f1  "I have found it" (}{\b\f1 ut\'favie-nye-s}{\f1  "have found-I-it") }{\i\f1 
(LotR3:VI ch. 5) 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 tuvu}{\f1 - "receive" }{\i\f1 (GL:71; is this "Qenya" word related to #}{\b\i\f1 tuv}{\i\f1 - "find"?)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab -}{\b\f1 twa}{\f1  ending for dual possessive }{\i\f1 (Plotz)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tyal}{\f1 - "play" (1st pers. aorist }{\b\f1 tyalin}{\f1  "I play") }{\i\f1 (TYAL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tyalangan}{\f1  "harp-player" }{\i\f1 (TYAL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tyali\'eb}{\f1  "sport, play, game" }{\i\f1 (TYAL, LT1:260)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tyar-}{\f1  "cause" }{\i\f1 (KYAR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tyaro}{\f1  "doer, actor, agent" }{\i\f1 (KAR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tyav}{\f1 - "taste" (1st pers. aorist }{\b\f1 tyavin}{\f1  "I taste")}{\i\f1  (KYAB)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ty\'e1v\'eb}{\f1  pl. #}{\b\f1 ty\'e1ver}{\f1  "taste", noun (pl. attested only in the compound }{\b\f1 l\'e1maty\'e1ver}{\f1 , see }{\b\f1 l\'e1maty\'e1v\'eb}{\f1 .) }{\i\f1 (MR:215, 216)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tye}{\f1  "you, thee" as object }{\i\f1 (LR:70, Arct)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tyel}{\f1  (probably }{\b\f1 tyeld}{\f1 -, cf. long form }{\b\f1 tyeld\'eb}{\f1 ) "end" (noun) }{\i\f1 (FS, KYEL) 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tyel}{\f1 - "end, cease" }{\i\f1 (KYEL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tyelca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "swift, agile" }{\i\f1 (KYELEK)}{\f1 , "hasty"}{\i\f1  (PM:353)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Tyelcormo}{\i\f1  ("k")}{\f1  "hasty-riser", mother-name (never used in narrative) of }{\b\f1 Turcafinw\'eb}{\f1  = Celegorm }{\i\f1 (PM:353)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tyeld\'eb}{\f1  "end" (noun), also short form }{\b\f1 tyel}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (KYEL)}{\b\f1 
\par \tab tyelima}{\f1  "final" }{\i\f1 (KYEL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tyell\'eb}{\f1  "grade" (pl. }{\b\f1 tyeller}{\f1  attested) }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tyelma}{\f1  "ending" }{\i\f1 (FS)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tyelp\'eb}{\f1  "silver" }{\i\f1 (KYELEP/TELEP)}{\f1 , etymology also in Letters:426 and UT:266. }{\b\f1 Tyelp\'eb}{\f1  is the true Quenya descendant of primitive *}{\i\f1 kyelep\'ea}{\f1 , but the Telerin form }{\b\f1 telp\'eb}{\f1 
 was more common, "for the Teleri prized silver above gold, and their skill as silversmiths was esteemed even by the Noldor" }{\i\f1 (UT:266)}{\f1 .
\par \tab }{\b\f1 Tyelperinquar}{\f1  "Silver-fist, Celebrimbor" }{\i\f1 (PM:318; also }{\b\i\f1 Telperinqar}{\i\f1 , q.v.)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 tyelpet\'e9ma}{\f1  "palatal series" }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 Tyelperion}{\f1  less common name of }{\b\f1 Telperion}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (UT:266)}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tyulma }{\f1 "mast" }{\i\f1 (TYUL, SD:419). "}{\f1 Qenya" pl. }{\b\f1 tyulmin }{\f1 "masts" in MC:216; read *}{\b\f1 tyulmar}{\f1  in LotR-style Quenya.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab tyuluss\'eb}{\f1  "poplar-tree" }{\i\f1 (TYUL)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 tyur}{\f1  "cheese" }{\i\f1 (QL:50 cf. GL:28)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 
\par <U>
\par }{\b\f1 \tab u}{\f1 - "not do, not be" (1st pers. aorist }{\b\f1 uin}{\f1  "I do not, am not"), pa.t. }{\b\f1 \'fam\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (UGU/UMU)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'fa}{\f1  adv and prep. "without, destitute of" (VT39:14). Usually followed by genitive: }{\b\f1 \'fa calo}{\f1  "without light" (}{\i\f1 cala}{\f1 ).
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \'fa}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (prefix)}{\f1  "not-, un-, in-", denying presence or possession of thing or quality }{\i\f1 (VT39:14, UGU/UMU, G\'db, LT1:272)}{\f1 . Tolkien at one point considered redefining }{
\b\f1 \'fa}{\f1 - as an }{element signifying "bad, uneasy, hard"; the already-published form }{\b \'fan\'f3tima}{ would then mean "difficult/impossible to count" rather than simply "uncountable" }{\i (VT42:33)}{.}{\f1 
 However, Tolkien's very last word on the matter seems to be that }{\b\f1 \'fa}{\f1 - was to remain a mere negative }{\i\f1 (VT44:4)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab \'daamanyar}{\f1  "those not of Aman" (sg. #}{\b\f1 \'daamanya}{\f1 ), Elves who did not reach the Blessed Realm (but did leave Cuivi\'e9nen with the intention of going there) = }{\b\f1 Heceldi}{\f1  }
{\i\f1 (WJ:371). }{\f1 Also }{\b\f1 \'damanyar}{\f1  and fuller }{\b\f1 \'damaneldi}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (WJ:373)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 u\'eb}{\f1  "fleece" }{\i\f1 (LT1:249)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab uf\'e1r\'eba}{\f1  "not enough" }{\i\f1 (FS)}{\f1 . Cf. }{\b\f1 \'fa}{\f1 - "un-" and }{\b\f1 f\'e1r\'eba}{\f1  "enough, sufficient" (read *}{\b\f1 \'faf\'e1r\'eba}{\f1 ?)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab uil\'eb}{\f1  "long trailing plant", especially "seaweed" }{\i\f1 (UY)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 uin}{\f1  (1) see }{\b\f1 u}{\f1 -.}{\i\f1 
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 Uin}{\f1  (2) "the primeval whale" }{\i\f1 (LT1:263)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Uinen }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 Uinend}{\f1 -, as in dative }{\b\f1 Uinenden}{\f1 ) name of a Maia, spouse of Oss\'eb }{\i\f1 (UY, NEN)}{\f1 . Adopted and adapted from Valarin }{\i\f1 (WJ:404)}{\f1 , though it is also said that it contains -}{\b\f1 nen}
{\f1  "water"}{\i\f1  (SA:nen)}{\f1 ; the latter explanation may be folk etymology. In the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1 , the name is derived from the same stem }{\i\f1 (UY)}{\f1  as }{\b\f1 uil\'eb}{\f1  "long trailing plant, especially seaweed".}{\i\f1 

\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'dalairi}{\f1  "Nazg\'fbl" (sg. *}{\b\f1 \'dalair\'eb}{\f1 ? *}{\b\f1 \'dalair}{\f1 ?) Etymology obscure.
\par \tab }{\b\f1 Ulban}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 Ulband}{\f1 -) "monster" (a name of Melko) }{\i\f1 (LT1:260)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 ulca}{\f1  "evil, bad, wicked, wrong" }{\i\f1 (QL:97; in LotR-period Quenya attested in }{\b\i\f1 henulca}{\i\f1  "evileyed", SD:68)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'fal\'eba}{\f1  "pouring, flooding, flowing" }{\i\f1 (ULU)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ull\'eb}{\f1  intr. pa.t. of }{\b\i\f1 ulya}{\f1 -, q.v. }{\i\f1 (ULU)}{\f1 . Cf. }{\b\f1 ullier}{\f1  "poured", a pl. past tense of }{\b\f1 ulya}{\f1 - "pour" occurring in LR:47; read probably *}{\b\f1 uller}{\f1 
 in Tolkien's later Quenya. In SD:247, }{\b\f1 ullier}{\f1  is translated "should flow".
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ullum\'eb}{\f1  an word occurring in }{\i\f1 F\'edriel's Song}{\f1 , evidently meaning "not for ever". Cf. }{\b\f1 \'fa}{\f1 -, }{\b\f1 l\'fam\'eb}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ulmo}{\f1  name of the Vala of all waters }{\i\f1 (ULU)}{\f1 , interpreted "the Pourer" by folk etymology, but the name was actually adopted and adapted from Valarin }{\i\f1 (WJ:400) 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ulmula}{\f1  "mumbling" }{\i\f1 (MC:214; this is "Qenya") }{\b\f1 
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 ulto}{\f1 - "pour" (intransitive?) }{\i\f1 (LT1:270; in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 ulya}{\i\f1 - pa.t. }{\b\i\f1 ull\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 ulu}{\f1 - "pour" (transitive?) }{\i\f1 (LT1:270; in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 ulya}{\i\f1 - pa.t. }{\b\i\f1 ulyan\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ulum\'fari}{\f1  The great horns of Ulmo; etymology obscure }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ulund\'eb}{\f1  "flood"}{\i\f1  (ULU)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ulundo}{\f1  "monster, deformed and hideous creature" }{\i\f1 (\'daLUG)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ulya}{\f1 - "pour", intr. pa.t. }{\b\f1 ull\'eb}{\f1 , tr. }{\b\f1 ulyan\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (ULU)}{\f1 . Cf. }{\b\f1 ullier}{\f1  "poured", a pl. past tense of }{\b\f1 ulya}{\f1 - occurring in LR:47; read probably *}{\b\f1 uller}{\f1 
 in Tolkien's later Quenya. In SD:247, }{\b\f1 ullier}{\f1  is translated "should flow". }{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab um}{\f1 - "not do, not be" (1st pers. aorist }{\b\f1 umin}{\f1  "I do not, am not"), past tense }{\b\f1 \'fam\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (UGU/UMU)}{\f1 . Future tense }{\b\f1 \'fava}{\f1 ? (q.v.)}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'damaneldi}{\f1  *"Non-Aman Elves", Elves who never dwelt in Aman (= }{\b\f1 \'damanyar}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (WJ:373)}{\f1 . Sg. #}{\b\f1 \'damanel}{\f1 , #}{\b\f1 \'damaneld}{\f1 -.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'damanyar}{\f1  "those not of Aman", Eldar that did not reach Aman, sc. Sindar and Nandor }{\i\f1 (SA:m\'e2n). }{\f1 Sg. #}{\b\f1 \'damanya}{\f1 .}{\i\f1  }{\f1 Also }{\b\f1 \'daamanyar}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab umbar}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 umbart}{\f1 -, as in dat.sg. }{\b\f1 umbarten}{\f1 ) "fate. doom" }{\i\f1 (MBARAT)}{\f1 , also name of tengwa 6 }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Umbardacil}{\f1  "Umbar-victor" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 ; the place-name }{\i\f1 Umbar}{\f1  is not Quenya and has no connection with }{\b\f1 umbar}{\f1  "fate".
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Umbarto}{\f1  "Fated", mother-name (never used in narrative) of }{\b\f1 Telufinw\'eb}{\f1  = Amras. The ominous name was altered to }{\b\f1 Ambarto}{\f1  by F\'ebanor. }{\i\f1 (PM:353-354)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'fam\'eb}{\f1  pa.t. of }{\b\i\f1 um}{\f1 - (and }{\b\i\f1 u}{\i\f1 -?}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (UGU/UMU)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'fam\'eba}{\f1  "evil" }{\i\f1 (UGU/UMU)}{\f1 . Is this connected to }{\b\f1 \'fam\'ebai}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 Narqelion}{\f1 , perhaps a "Qenya" plural form?
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \'fana}{\f1  "deprived of, destitute, forlorn" }{\i\f1 (VT39:14)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \'fanat}{\f1  "a thing impossible to be or to be done" }{\i\f1 (VT39:26)}{\f1  Cf. }{\b\f1 \'fa}{\f1 - and }{\b\f1 nat}{\f1 .
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab unca}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "hollow out" }{\i\f1 (UNUK)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 Undolaur\'eb}{\f1  "Glorund" (> Glaurung). Also }{\b\f1 Laurundo}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (LT2:341)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab und\'f3m\'eb}{\f1  "twilight", usually of the time near evening, not near dawn (that is }{\b\f1 tind\'f3m\'eb}{\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab undu}{\f1  "down, under, beneath" }{\i\f1 (UNU)}{\f1 , prefix}{\i\f1  }{\b\f1 undu}{\f1 - "down", in }{\b\f1 undul\'e1v\'eb}{\f1  "down-licked" = covered. }{\b\f1 Lumbul\'eb undul\'e1v\'eb ily\'eb tier}{\f1 
 "(heavy) shadow down-licked all paths", lyrical translation "all paths are drowned deep in shadow"
\par }{\b\f1 \tab undum\'eb}{\f1  "abyss" (}{\i\f1 Markirya)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 \'daner}{\f1  "Noman" }{\i\f1 (UT:211)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ungo}{\f1  "cloud, dark shadow" }{\i\f1 (U\'d1G)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ungoliant\'eb}{\f1  "Ungoliant" (the Spider, ally of Morgoth); also }{\b\f1 Ungweliant\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (U\'d1G, DYEL, SLIG)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ungwal\'eb}{\f1  "torture" }{\i\f1 (\'d1GWAL)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 ungw\'eb}{\f1  "spider's web", also name of tengwa 8 }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 . However, this word was defined as "gloom" in the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (U\'d1G)}{\f1 ,  while in early "Qenya" it meant "spider" ("especially }
{\i\f1 Ungw\'eb}{\f1  the Gloomweaver" = Ungoliant) }{\i\f1 (LT1:271)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Ungweliant\'eb}{\f1  the Spider, ally of Morgoth }{\i\f1 (U\'d1G)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 unot\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 unot\'eba}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (read *}{\b\i\f1 \'fanot\'eb}{\i\f1 , *}{\b\i\f1 \'fanot\'eba}{\i\f1 ?)}{\f1  "not counted, uncounted" }{\i\f1 (VT39:14)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \'fan\'f3tima}{\f1  "not possible to count, countless" }{\i\f1 (VT39:14)}{\f1 , pl. }{\b\f1 \'fan\'f3tim\'eb}{\f1  (translated "numberless") attested (}{\b\f1 \'fa-n\'f3t-im\'eb}{\f1 
 "not-count-able") }{\i\f1 (Nam, RGEO:66, Appendix E)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab unqua}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "hollow" (adj.)}{\i\f1  (UNUK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab unqual\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "agony, death" }{\i\f1 (KWAL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab unqu\'eb}{\f1  "hollow" (noun) }{\i\f1 (UNUK)}{\f1 , also name of tengwa 16 }{\i\f1 (Appendix E; there spelt }{\f1 unque}{\i\f1 , while the }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1  has }{\f1 unqe}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab unt\'fapa}{\f1  "down-roofs" = covers (perhaps for *}{\b\f1 undut\'fapa}{\f1 -, cf. }{\b\f1 undu}{\f1 -). Present tense of }{\b\f1 untup}{\f1 - with lengthening of the stem vowel and the suffix -}{\b\f1 a}{\f1  (cf. }{\b\f1 s\'edla}{\f1 
 "shines" from }{\b\f1 sil}{\f1 -)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab unuhuin\'eb}{\f1  "under-shadow" }{\i\f1 (LR:47)}{\f1 ; see }{\b\f1 huin\'eb}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'fany\'e1rima}{\f1  "impossible to recount" (because all the facts are not known, or the tale is to long) }{\i\f1 (WJ:370)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'faqu\'e9tima}{\f1  "unspeakable", sc. impossible to say, put into words; also "unpronounceable" }{\i\f1 (WJ:370)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'far}{\f1  "fire"}{\i\f1  (UR)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 This stem was struck out in Etym, but a word that must be derived from it occurs in LotR, so it seems that Tolkien restored it. Early "Qenya" also has }{\b\i\f1 \'dbr}{\i\f1  "the Sun" (also }{
\b\i\f1 \'dari}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 \'darinci}{\i\f1  ("k"), }{\b\i\f1 Urwen}{\i\f1 ) (LT1:271). Cf. }{\b\i\f1 \'dari}{\i\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'dar-anar}{\f1  word occurring in }{\i\f1 F\'edriel's Song}{\f1 , translated "the red sun"; actually the prefixed element }{\b\f1 \'far}{\f1 - must have to do with the element }{\i\f1 ur-}{\f1  "heat, be hot" mentioned in the }{\i\f1 
Silmarillion}{\f1  Appendix.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'fara}{\f1  "large"}{\i\f1  (UR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab urco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1 , pl. }{\b\f1 urqui}{\f1 , an old word used in the lore of the Blessed Realm for anything that caused fear to the Elves during the March; by the Exiles recognized as the cognate of Sindarin }{\i\f1 orch}{\f1 
 and used to mean "Orc". The Sindarin-influenced form }{\b\f1 orco}{\f1  was also used. }{\i\f1 (WJ:390)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 urdu}{\f1  "death" }{\i\f1 (LT2:342; rather }{\b\i\f1 nuru}{\i\f1  in Tolkien's later Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'far\'eb}{\f1  "heat", also name of tengwa 36 }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'fari }{\f1 "sun" }{\i\f1 (MC:214, 221; this is "Qenya")}{\f1 ; genitive }{\b\f1 \'fario}{\f1  "sun's" }{\i\f1 (MC:216)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'darim\'eb}{\f1  (in some editions }{\b\f1 Urim\'eb}{\f1 , but this seems to be an error; cf. }{\b\f1 \'far\'eb}{\f1  "heat") eighth month of the year, "August" }{\i\f1 (Appendix D, SA:ur-, UT:302)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 \'farin }{\f1 "blazing hot" }{\i\f1 (LT1:271)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'darin}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 \'darind}{\f1 -, as in "g.sg. }{\i\f1 \'darinden}{\f1 ", in LotR-style Quenya this is dat.sg.) a name of the Sun }{\i\f1 (UR; this stem was struck out in Etym, but several words that must be derived from it occur in L
otR, so it seems that Tolkien restored it.)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'darion}{\f1  (Q?) a title of Fionw\'eb (= later E\'f6nw\'eb); see the LR index. }{\i\f1 (UR; this stem was struck out in Etym, but several words that must be derived from it occur in LotR, so it seems that Tolkien restored it.)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 urna}{\f1  "oven" }{\i\f1 (LT1:271)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 uru}{\f1  "fire" }{\i\f1 (LT1:271)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab uruit\'eb}{\f1  "fiery" }{\i\f1 (UR; this}{\f1  }{\i\f1 stem was struck out in Etym, but several words that must be derived from it occur in LotR, so it seems that Tolkien restored it.)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab urul\'f3k\'eb}{\f1  "fire-dragon" }{\i\f1 (LOK)}{\f1 , pl. }{\b\f1 Urul\'f3ki}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (SA:ur-)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Urundil}{\f1  masc.name, "copper-lover" }{\i\f1 (PM:365)}{\f1 ; this apparently suggests #}{\b\f1 urun}{\f1  as a word for "copper".
\par \tab }{\b\f1 urus}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 urust}{\f1 -) "copper" }{\i\f1 (VT41:10)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'faruva}{\f1  "fiery" }{\i\f1 (from UR; this stem was struck out in Etym, but several words that must be derived from it occur in LotR, so it seems that Tolkien restored it. The word }{\b\i\f1 \'faruva}{\i\f1 
 also occurred in early "Qenya"; in LT1:271 it is glossed "like fire".)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 uruvoit\'eb}{\f1  "fiery" }{\i\f1 (LT1:271)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 urwa}{\f1  "on fire" }{\i\f1 (LT1:271)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 urya}{\f1 - "burn" (intransitive) }{\i\f1 (LT1:271)}{\f1 
\par \tab #}{\b\f1 us}{\f1 - "escape", verb }{\i\f1 (given in the form }{\b\i\f1 usin}{\i\f1  "he escapes" in LT1:251; this would have to mean "I escape" if the word is to be adopted to Tolkien's later Quenya)}{\f1 . Cf. }{\b\f1 usw\'eb}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab usqu\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("q")}{\f1  "reek" }{\i\f1 (USUK)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 usta}{\f1 - "burn" (transitive) }{\i\f1 (LT1:271)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 usw\'eb}{\f1  "issue, escape" (noun) }{\i\f1 (LT1:251)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 Uswevand\'eb}{\f1  "way of escape" }{\i\f1 (LT2:336)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ut\'falien}{\f1  }{\i\f1 see}{\f1  }{\b\f1 tul}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (EO)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Utumno}{\f1  name of the first great stronghold of Melkor in the North }{\i\f1 (SA:tum, TUB)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ut\'favienyes}{\f1  see *}{\b\f1 tuv}{\f1 -
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'fava}{\f1  "will not", future tense of a negative verb (present/aorist tense }{\b\f1 \'fay\'eb}{\f1 ?) in }{\i\f1 F\'edriel's Song}{\f1 . Cf. also the negative verb }{\b\f1 u}{\f1 -, }{\b\f1 um}{\f1 - "not do, not be".
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 uva}{\f1  future tense ending. In }{\b\f1 laituvalmet}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 tiruvantes}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 enquantuva}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 cenuva}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 caluva}{\f1 .
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \'favan\'eb}{\f1  "without beauty", adj. }{\b\f1 \'favan\'eba}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (VT39:14)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \'favanima}{\f1  "not fair, ugly" }{\i\f1 (VT39:14)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \'davanimo}{\f1  "monster (creature of Melko[r]) }{\i\f1 (BAN, LT1:272)}{\f1 ; pl. }{\b\f1 \'favanimor}{\f1  "monsters" }{\i\f1 (UGU/UMU, (G\'db) )}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab \'fav\'eb}{\f1  "abundance, great quantity" }{\i\f1 (UB)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'fav\'eba}{\f1  "abundant, in very great number, very large" }{\i\f1 (UB)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab \'fay\'eb}{\f1  a verb occurring in}{\i\f1  F\'edriel's Song}{\f1 , apparently }{\b\f1 ye}{\f1  "is" with the negative prefix }{\b\f1 \'fa}{\f1 -, hence "is not" (}{\b\f1 \'fay\'eb s\'e9r\'eb indo-ninya s\'edmen}{\f1 , tran
slated "my hearth resteth not here", literally evidently *"[there] is not rest [for] my heart here")
\par 
\par <V>
\par }{\b\f1 \tab v\'e1}{\f1  (exclamation) "I will not!" or "Do not!"; }{\b\f1 v\'e1n}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 v\'e1ny\'eb}{\f1  "I won't!", }{\b\f1 vamm\'eb}{\f1  "we won't" }{\i\f1 (WJ:371)}{\f1 
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 va}{\f1  possessive ending, in }{\b\f1 Eldali\'e9va}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Ingoldova}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 miruv\'f3reva}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Orom\'e9va}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Valin\'f3reva}{\f1  (q.v. for references). Pl. -}{\b\f1 v\'eb}{\f1 
 when governing a plural word (from archaic -}{\b\f1 vai}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (WJ:407)}{\f1 , but it seems that -}{\b\f1 va}{\f1  was used throughout in late Exilic Quenya (cf. }{\b\f1 miruv\'f3reva}{\f1  governing the plural word }{\b\f1 yuldar}{\f1  in }{
\i\f1 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\f1 ). Pl. -}{\b\f1 iva}{\f1  (-}{\b\f1 iv\'eb}{\f1 ), dual -}{\b\f1 twa}{\f1 , partitive pl. -}{\b\f1 l\'edva}{\f1 .
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 vacco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "jacket, cloak" }{\i\f1 (GL:21)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab vah\'e1ya}{\f1  "far away" }{\i\f1 (LR:47, SD:310)}{\f1 . Also spelt }{\b\f1 vahaiya}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (SD:247)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab vahta}{\f1 - "to soil, stain" }{\i\f1 (WA3)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab vaia}{\f1  < }{\b\f1 waia}{\f1  (also }{\b\f1 vaiya}{\f1  < }{\b\f1 waiya}{\f1 ) "envelope", especially of the Outer Sea or Air enfolding the world within the Ilurambar or world-walls }{\i\f1 (WAY)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Vaiaro}{\f1  a name of Ulmo, lord of Vaiya }{\i\f1 (WAY)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 vaima}{\f1  "robe" }{\i\f1 (LT1:271)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 vaina}{\f1  "clad" }{\i\f1 (LT1:272)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 vain\'eb}{\f1  "sheath" }{\i\f1 (LT1:271)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 vainol\'eb}{\f1  "quiver" (noun) }{\i\f1 (LT1:271)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Vair\'eb}{\f1  "the Weaver", name of a Vali\'eb, spouse of Mandos }{\i\f1 (Silm, WEY)}{\f1 . The name is translated "Ever-weaving" in VT39:10, and it is implied that the archaic form was *}{\i\f1 Wair\'ea}{\f1  rather than }{\i\f1 Weir\'ea}{
\f1 , the reconstruction given in the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (LR:398)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 vaita}{\f1 - "to wrap" }{\i\f1 (LT1:271)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab vaiwa}{\f1  "wind" }{\i\f1 (W\'c2/WAWA/WAIWA)}{\b\f1 
\par \tab vaiya}{\f1  < }{\b\f1 waiya}{\f1  (also }{\b\f1 vaia}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 waia}{\f1 ) "envelope" (noun), especially of the Outer Sea or Air enfolding the world within the Ilurambar or world-walls }{\i\f1 (WAY, capitalized }{\b\i\f1 Vaiya}{\i\f1 
 under GEY; the latter entry was struck out)}{\f1 . In a "Qenya" text in MC:214, }{\b\f1 vaiya}{\f1  is simply translated "sky". }{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Vala}{\f1  "Power, God, angelic power", pl. }{\b\f1 Valar}{\f1  or }{\b\f1 Vali}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (BAL, Appendix E, LT2:348)}{\f1 
. The Valar are a group of immensely powerful spirits guarding the world on behalf of its Creator; they are sometimes called Gods, though this is strictly wrong according to Christian terminology: the Valar were created. The noun }{\b\f1 vala}{\f1 
 is also the name of tengwa 22 }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 . Gen. pl. }{\b\f1 Valion}{\f1  "of the Valar" }{\i\f1 (FS, MR:18)}{\f1 ; this form shows the pl. }{\b\f1 Vali}{\f1 , (irregular) alternative to }{\b\f1 Valar}{\f1  (the gen.pl. could certainly be *
}{\b\f1 Valaron}{\f1  as well). Pl. allative }{\b\f1 valannar}{\f1  *"to/on the Valar" (LR:47, 56; SD:246). }{\b\f1 Vala}{\f1  is properly a verb "has power" (sc. over the matter of E\'e4), also used as a noun "a Power" }{\i\f1 (WJ:403). }{\f1 The verb }{
\b\f1 vala}{\f1 - "rule, order", used with reference to the Valar only, is attested only in the sentences }{\b\f1 \'e1 vala Manw\'eb!}{\f1  "may Manw\'eb order it!" and }{\b\f1 Valar valuvar}{\f1  "the will of the Valar will be done" }{\i\f1 (WJ:404). }{
\f1 However, Tolkien did not associate the word }{\b\f1 Valar}{\f1  with power from the beginning; it apparently meant "the happy ones" in Tolkien's original conception; cf. }{\b\f1 valto}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 vald}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (LT2:348)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Valacar}{\f1  masc. name, *"Vala-head"??? }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Valacirca}{\f1  "Sickle of the Gods", a name of the Great Bear (Big Dipper) constellation }{\i\f1 (SA:val-, MR:388, KIRIK, OT/OTOS/OTOK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Valandil}{\f1  masc. name, "God-friend, *Vala-friend" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A, translated in LR:60)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Valandur}{\f1  masc. name, *"Vala-servant" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab valaina}{\f1  "of or belonging to the Valar, divine" }{\i\f1 (BAL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Valandor}{\f1  "the land of the Valar", confused with and replaced by }{\b\f1 Valin\'f3r\'eb}{\f1  "the people of the Valar", short form }{\b\f1 Valinor}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (SA:d\'f4r, Silm)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Valanya}{\f1  last day of the Eldarin six-day week, dedicated to the Valar (}{\i\f1 Appendix D}{\f1 ). Etymology, see Letters:427. Also called }{\b\f1 T\'e1rion}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Valaquenta}{\f1  "Account of the Valar" }{\i\f1 (SA:val-)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Valarauco}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "Demon of Might" }{\i\f1 (here }{\b\i\f1 vala}{\i\f1 - assumes its basic meaning "power, might")}{\f1 , Sindarin }{\i\f1 balrog}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WJ:415)}{\f1 . Pl. }{\b\f1 Valaraucar}{\f1  (sic, not -}{\b\f1 
or}{\f1 ) "Balrogs" }{\i\f1 (SA:val-, SA:rauco)}{\f1 . Earlier forms from the "Qenya Lexicon" are }{\b\f1 Valcarauc\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Malcarauc\'eb}{\f1  (q.v.); these should probably be ignored in LotR-style Quenya.
\par \tab }{\b\f1 #Valariand\'eb}{\f1  "Beleriand" (genitive in the phrase }{\b\f1 Nyarna Valarianden}{\f1  "the annals of Beleriand" in LR:202; Tolkien later changed the genitive ending from -}{\b\f1 n}{\f1  to -}{\b\f1 o}{\f1 ; hence read *}{\b\f1 
Nyarna Valariand\'ebo}{\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Valar\'f3ma}{\f1  "Vala-horn", Orom\'eb's horn }{\i\f1 (Silm)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab valass\'eb}{\f1  "divinity" (or rather *"valahood"; the word should probably not be used with reference to the divinity of Eru). }{\i\f1 (BAL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Valatar}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 Valat\'e1r}{\f1 - as in "gen.sg. }{\i\f1 Valat\'e1ren}{\f1 ", in Tolkien's later Quenya this is a dative singular instead) "Vala-king", applied to the nine chief Valar: Manwe, Ulmo, Aule, Mandos, Lorien, Tulkas, Oss\'eb
, Orome, and Melko[r]. }{\i\f1 Note: This list, recorded in the }{\f1 Etymologies, }{\i\f1 differs from the scenario of the published Silmarillion; Oss\'eb is not a Vala in Tolkien's later conception.}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (BAL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Valat\'e1ri}{\f1  "Vala-queen" }{\i\f1 (BAL; it is there said that }{\b\i\f1 Vala}{\i\f1  has no feminine form except this compound, but Silm gives }{\b\i\f1 Vali\'eb}{\i\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab valcan\'eb }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "vague" }{\i\f1 (MC:213; this is "Qenya")}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 Valcarauc\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "balrog", also }{\b\f1 Malcarauc\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (LT1:250; in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 valarauco}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 vald}{\f1 - "blessedness, happiness" }{\i\f1 (LT1:272 - a final vowel would seem to be required)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 valda}{\f1  "worth, worthy, dear" }{\i\f1 (GL:23)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 Vald\'eb}{\f1  "female Vala" (also }{\b\f1 Valis}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (LT1:272, in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 Vali\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Vali\'eb}{\f1  female Vala, pl. }{\b\f1 Valier}{\f1  attested }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Valimar}{\f1  "Vala-home", a region in Valinor, also called }{\b\f1 Valmar}{\f1 . In }{\i\f1 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\f1 , this word is used = }{\b\f1 Valinor}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (Nam, RGEO:67)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 valimo}{\f1  "happy" }{\i\f1 (LT1:272; no adjectives end in -}{\b\i\f1 o}{\i\f1  in LotR-style Quenya. Use }{\b\i\f1 valin}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 valin}{\f1  "happy" }{\i\f1 (LT1:272)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Valinor}{\f1  "the land (or people) of the Valar", *"Vali-land" (Vali = Valar), land of the Gods in the West }{\i\f1 (BAL, NDOR)}{\f1 ; cf. }{\b\f1 Valandor}{\f1 . Full form }{\b\f1 Valin\'f3r\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (BAL; }{\b\i\f1 Vali-n\'f3r\'eb
}{\i\f1  }{\f1 under}{\i\f1  NDOR) }{\f1 In the early "Qenya Lexicon", }{\b\f1 Valinor}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Valin\'f3r\'eb}{\f1  is glossed "Asgard", the name of the city of the gods in Norse mythology }{\i\f1 (LT1:272)}{\f1 . Possessive (here object genitive) 
}{\b\f1 Valin\'f3reva}{\f1  in }{\b\f1 Nurtal\'eb Valin\'f3reva}{\f1 , the "Hiding of Valinor" }{\i\f1 (Silm}{\f1 ).}{\i\f1 
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 Valis}{\f1  "female Vala" (also }{\b\f1 Vald\'eb}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (LT1:272; in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 Vali\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Valmar}{\f1  alternative form of }{\b\f1 Valimar}{\f1 , q.v. }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 Valmo}{\f1  "male Vala" (also }{\b\f1 Valon}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (LT1:272; these forms may or may not be valid in Tolkien's later Quenya)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 Valon}{\f1  "male Vala" (also }{\b\f1 Valmo}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (LT1:272; these forms may or may not be valid in Tolkien's later Quenya)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 Valsi}{\f1  = }{\b\f1 Valis}{\f1 ? }{\i\f1 (LT1:272)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 -}{\b\f1 valta}{\f1  "-less", also -}{\b\f1 vilt\'eb}{\f1  (evidently endings used to derive adjectives like "lifeless") }{\i\f1 (GL:23)}{\f1  
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 valto}{\f1  "luck" }{\i\f1 (LT1:272)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab valya}{\f1  adj. "having (divine) authority or power"}{\i\f1  (BAL; this word is of course etymologically connected to the }{\b\i\f1 Valar}{\i\f1  and should not be used with reference to the divinity of Eru.)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab v\'e1n}{\f1  "goose"; pl. }{\b\f1 v\'e1ni}{\f1  given }{\i\f1 (WA-N)}{\f1 . Older }{\b\f1 w\'e1n}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab V\'e1na}{\f1  name of a Vali\'eb, the wife of Orom\'eb }{\i\f1 (Silm, WJ:383)}{\f1 ; the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1  gives }{\b\f1 Vana}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (BAN)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 Vanar}{\f1  or }{\b\f1 Vani}{\f1  = }{\b\f1 Valar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (LT1:272)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 vand}{\f1 - "way, path" }{\i\f1 (LT1:264; a final vowel would seem to be required, but in Tolkien's later Quenya, the words }{\b\i\f1 ti\'eb}{\i\f1  or }{\b\i\f1 mall\'eb}{\i\f1  are to be preferred)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab vanda}{\f1  "oath, pledge, solemn promise" }{\i\f1 (CO)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 vandl}{\f1  "staff" }{\i\f1 (LT1:264)}{\f1  (No word can end in -}{\i\f1 dl}{\f1  in Tolkien's later Quenya; the word may be adapted as *}{\b\f1 vandil}{\f1 . Compare }{\b\f1 findl}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 findil}{\f1 .)
\par \tab }{\b\f1 van\'eb}{\f1  "fair" }{\i\f1 (LT1:272; in Tolkien's later Quenya rather }{\b\i\f1 vanya}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab v\'e1n\'eb}{\f1  past tense of }{\b\f1 auta}{\f1 -, q.v. }{\i\f1 (WJ:366)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab vaness\'eb}{\f1  "beauty" }{\i\f1 (LT1:272)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab vanga}{\f1  "beard" }{\i\f1 (LT2:344, GL:21; in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 fanga}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab v\'e1ni\'eb}{\f1  an augmentless perfect of }{\b\f1 auta}{\f1 - (q.v.) that may occur in verse; regular form }{\b\f1 av\'e1ni\'eb }{\i\f1 (WJ:366)}{\b\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 vanima}{\f1  "beautiful, fair" }{\i\f1 (BAN, VT39:14)}{\f1  (glossed "proper, right, fair" in early "Qenya", LT1:272); nominal pl. }{\b\f1 vanimar}{\f1  "beautiful ones", partitive pl. genitive }{
\b\f1 vanim\'e1lion}{\f1 , translated "of beautiful children", but literally meaning *"of [some] beautiful ones") }{\i\f1 (LotR3:VI ch. 6, translated in Letters:308)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Arwen vanimalda}{\f1 
 "Beautiful Arwen", literally "Arwen your beauty" (see -}{\b\f1 lda}{\f1  for reference; changed to }{\b\f1 Arwen vanimelda}{\f1  in the second edition of LotR)}{\i\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab vanimalda}{\f1  *"your beautiful"; }{\b\f1 Arwen vanimalda}{\f1  "Arwen your beauty = beautiful Arwen" }{\i\f1 (WJ:369; Tolkien emended }{\b\i\f1 vanimalda}{\i\f1  to }{\b\i\f1 vanimelda}{\i\f1 
 in the second edition of LotR; see under }{\b\i\f1 vanima}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Vanimeld\'eb}{\f1  fem. name, *"Beautiful-Dear-One" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Vanimo}{\f1  (pl. }{\b\f1 Vanimor}{\f1  given), "the beautiful", children of the Valar }{\i\f1 (BAN)}{\f1 , or "fair folk" = (men and) elves }{\i\f1 (UGU/UMU)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab vann\'eb}{\f1  pa.t. of }{\b\i\f1 vanya}{\i\f1 -}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WAN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab vanta}{\f1 - "to walk", also }{\b\f1 vanta}{\f1  noun "walk" }{\i\f1 (BAT)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab vanwa}{\f1  "gone, lost, no longer to be had, vanished, departed, dead, past, past and over, gone on the road, over" }{\i\f1 (WJ:366, Nam, RGEO:67, WAN, LT1:264)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab vanwi\'eb}{\f1  "the past, past time" }{\i\f1 (WAN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab vanya}{\f1  "fair" }{\i\f1 (FS)}{\f1 , "beautiful" }{\i\f1 (BAN)}{\f1 ; nominal pl. }{\b\f1 Vanyar}{\f1  "the Fair", the first clan of the Eldar; the original meaning of this stem was "pale, light-coloured, not brown or dark" }{\i\f1 (WJ:
380, 381)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab vanya}{\f1 - "go, depart, disappear", pa.t. }{\b\f1 vann\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (WAN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab v\'e1quet}{\f1 - (1st pers. aorist }{\b\f1 v\'e1quetin}{\f1  and 1st pers. past tense }{\b\f1 v\'e1quenten}{\f1  are given) "to say no" (not denying that something is true, but denying to do or to allow something: "to say I will not/do n
ot"; "to refuse", "to forbid" }{\i\f1 (WJ:370, 371)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 var}{\f1  "or" }{\i\f1 (QL:100)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab v\'e1ra}{\f1  "soiled, dirty" }{\i\f1 (WA3)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 vard}{\f1 - "rule, govern" }{\i\f1 (LT1:273; hardly valid in Tolkien's later Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Varda}{\f1  "the Sublime", name of a Vali\'eb, spouse of Manw\'eb, the Queen of the Valar, called }{\i\f1 Elbereth}{\f1  in Sindarin }{\i\f1 (BARATH, BAR\'c1D, WJ:402; in Letters:282 }{\b\i\f1 Varda}{\i\f1  is translated the "Lofty")}{\f1 
 Genitive }{\b\f1 Vardo}{\f1  (for *}{\i\f1 Vardao}{\f1 ). }{\i\f1 (Nam, RGEO:66)}{\f1 . }{\b\f1 Vardamir}{\f1  masc. name, *"Varda-jewel" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 vardarianna}{\f1  ?"Varda-gift", name of a tree }{\i\f1 (but the }{\b\i\f1 ri}{
\i\f1  element is obscure) (UT:167)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 vardar}{\f1  "king" }{\i\f1 (LT1:273; rather }{\b\i\f1 aran}{\i\f1  in LotR-style Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Vardo Meoita}{\f1  "Prince of Cats" }{\i\f1 (LT2:348; }{\b\i\f1 vardo}{\i\f1  "prince" is hardly a valid word in Tolkien's later Quenya; cf. }{\b\i\f1 vard}{\i\f1 -, }{\b\i\f1 vardar}{\i\f1 . Later Quenya has }{\b\i\f1 cundu}{\i\f1 
 for "prince".)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab varna}{\f1  "safe, protected secure" }{\i\f1 (BAR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab varnass\'eb}{\f1  "security" }{\i\f1 (BAR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab varn\'eb}{\f1  (1) "brown, swart, dark brown", in compounds }{\b\f1 varni}{\f1 - }{\i\f1 (BAR\'c1N)
\par }{\f1 \tab [}{\b\f1 varn\'eb}{\f1 ] (2) "protection" }{\i\f1 (BAR)}{\f1  
\par \tab }{\b\f1 varni}{\f1  "queen" }{\i\f1 (LT1:273; rather }{\b\i\f1 t\'e1ri}{\i\f1  in Tolkien's later Quenya)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab varya}{\f1 - "to protect" }{\i\f1 (BAR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab V\'e1sa}{\f1  "the Consumer", a name of the Sun }{\i\f1 (MR:130, Silm)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b vasar}{ (}{\b \'fe}{), noun "veil" }{\i (VT42:10, the word was "not in daily use", VT42:9)}{. Older form }{\b wa\'fear}{. }{\f1 
\par }{\b vasarya}{- }{\f1 (}{\b\f1 \'de}{\f1 ) }{"to veil" }{\i (VT42:10)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab ve}{\f1  "as, like" }{\i\f1 (Nam, RGEO:66, Markirya, MC:213, 214)}{\f1 ; in }{\i\f1 Narqelion}{\f1  }{\b\f1 ve}{\f1  may mean either "in" or "as"
\par }{\b\f1 \tab v\'eba}{\f1  (1) "adult, manly, vigorous" }{\i\f1 (WEG)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab v\'eba }{\f1 (2) "sea" }{\i\f1 (MC:213, 214, 216; this is "Qenya" and certainly obsoleted by # 1 above; use }{\b\i\f1 \'ebar}{\i\f1  in LotR-style Quenya)}{\f1 . Inflected }{\b\f1 v\'eban }{\f1 "sea" }{\i\f1 (MC:220)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 v\'ebar}{
\f1  "in sea" }{\i\f1 (a "Qenya" locative in -}{\b\i\f1 r}{\i\f1 , MC:213)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 v\'ebass\'eb }{\f1 "on sea" }{\i\f1 (MC:220)}{\f1 . Cf. also }{\b\f1 v\'ebacirya}{\f1 .}{\b\f1 
\par \tab v\'ebaciryo }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "of sea-ship", genitive of *}{\b\f1 v\'ebacirya }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (MC:216; this is "Qenya"; see }{\b\i\f1 v\'eba}{\i\f1  # 2)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab v\'ebaner}{\f1  "(adult) man"}{\i\f1  (WEG)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab v\'ebass\'eb}{\f1  "vigour" }{\i\f1 (WEG)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab v\'e9la}{\f1  "see" }{\i\f1 (Arct)}{\f1 ; present/continuative tense of a verbal stem #}{\b\f1 vel}{\f1 -?
\par \tab }{\b\f1 velca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "flame" }{\i\f1 (LT1:260; }{\b\i\f1 n\'e1r}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 n\'e1r\'eb}{\i\f1  would be the normal word in Tolkien's later Quenya)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 velic\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k") }{\f1 "great" }{\i\f1 (LT1:254; probably not valid in Tolkien's later Quenya; in the context of the }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1  it would have to be derived from }{\b\i\f1 BEL}{\i\f1 , but it is stated th
at this stem was "not found in Q". Perhaps Tolkien rejected }{\b\i\f1 velic\'eb}{\i\f1  because it was too similar to the Russian word that clearly inspired it.)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab v'ematt\'eb}{\f1  ??? May be the prepostition }{\b\f1 ve}{\f1  + an otherwise unknown word }{\b\f1 ematt\'eb}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (Narqelion)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab vend\'eb}{\f1  < }{\b\f1 wend\'eb}{\f1  "maiden" }{\i\f1 (WEN/WENED)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 ven\'eb}{\f1  "small boat, vessel, dish" }{\i\f1 (LT1:254)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab v\'e9n\'eb}{\f1  < }{\b\f1 w\'e9n\'eb}{\f1  "virginity" }{\i\f1 (WEN/WENED)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab veness\'eb}{\f1  "virginity" }{\i\f1 (WEN/WENED)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 veni\'eb}{\f1  "shape, cut" (prob. noun) }{\i\f1 (LT1:254)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab venw\'eb}{\f1  "shape, cut" (prob. noun) }{\i\f1 (LT1:254)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab v\'ebo}{\f1  "man" }{\i\f1 (WEG; etymologically connected to }{\b\i\f1 v\'eba}{\i\f1  "manly, vigorous"; the more neutral word for "man" is }{\b\i\f1 n\'e9r}{\i\f1 .)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab v\'e9ra}{\f1  (< Old Quenya }{\b\f1 w\'e9ra}{\f1 ) "personal, private, own" }{\i\f1 (PM:340)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab verca}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "wild" }{\i\f1 (BER\'c9K)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab v\'e9r\'eb}{\f1  "bond, troth, compact, oath" }{\i\f1 (WED)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab veri\'eb}{\f1  "boldness" }{\i\f1 (BER)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab verno}{\f1  "husband" }{\i\f1 (BES)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab veru}{\f1  "husband and wife, married pair" }{\i\f1 (BES)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab verya}{\f1 - "to dare"; adj. }{\b\f1 verya}{\f1  "bold" }{\i\f1 (BER)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab vess\'eb}{\f1  "wife" }{\i\f1 (BES)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab vesta}{\f1  "matrimony", verb }{\b\f1 vesta}{\f1 - "to wed" }{\i\f1 (BES)}{\f1 .}{\i\f1  (Under WED, the verb }{\b\i\f1 vesta}{\i\f1 - was defined as "swear to do something", but this was struck out.)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab vestal\'eb}{\f1  "wedding" }{\i\f1 (BES) (under WED the word was defined as "oath", but this was struck out)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab vi\'eb}{\f1  "manhood, vigour"}{\i\f1  (WEG)
\par }{\f1 \tab [}{\b\f1 vil}{\f1 -] "to fly"}{\i\f1  (The forms given are the 1st pers. aorist }{\b\i\f1 vilin}{\i\f1  "I fly" and the pa.t. }{\b\i\f1 vill\'eb}{\i\f1 . Changed to }{\b\i\f1 wilin}{\i\f1 , pa.t. presumably *}{\b\i\f1 wille}{\i\f1 .) (WIL)}{
\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 v\'edl\'eb}{\f1  "gentle breeze" }{\i\f1 (LT1:273)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 vilin}{\f1  "airy, breezy" }{\i\f1 (LT1:273)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 viliss\'eb}{\f1  "spirit" }{\i\f1 (GL:23)
\par }{\f1 -}{\b\f1 vilt\'eb}{\f1  "-less", also -}{\b\f1 valta}{\f1  (evidently endings used to derive adjectives like "lifeless") }{\i\f1 (GL:23)}{\f1  
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab [}{\b\f1 vilwa}{\f1  < }{\b\f1 wilwa}{\f1 ] "air, lower air" (distinct from the 'upper' air of the stars, or the 'outer') }{\i\f1 (WIL)}{\f1  
\par }{\b\f1 \tab vilya}{\f1  "air, sky", also name of tengwa 24. Older }{\b\f1 wilya}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 . Early "Qenya" has }{\b\f1 Vilya}{\f1  (changed from }{\b\f1 Vilna}{\f1 ) "lower air" }{\i\f1 (LT1:273)}{\f1 ; also }{\b\f1 vilya }{\f1 
"air" }{\i\f1 (MC:215)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Vincarna}{\f1  *"new-made, renewed" }{\i\f1 (MR:408)
\par }{\f1 \tab [}{\b\f1 vind\'eb}{\f1  "blue-grey, pale blue or grey" }{\i\f1 (WIN/WIND)}{\f1 ]
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Vingelot}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Vingilot}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Vingil\'f3t\'eb}{\f1  "Foam-flower", name of E\'e4rendil's ship }{\i\f1 (SA:wing, Silm)
\par }{\f1 \tab [}{\b\f1 vinta}{\f1 -, pa.t. }{\b\f1 vint\'eb}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 vintan\'eb}{\f1  "fade" }{\i\f1 (WIN/WIND)}{\f1 ]
\par }{\b\f1 \tab vinya}{\f1  (1) "new" (cf. compounds }{\b\f1 Vinyamar}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Vinyari\'eb}{\f1  below).
\par \tab }{\b\f1 vinya}{\f1  (2) < }{\b\f1 windya}{\f1  "pale blue" }{\i\f1 (WIN/WIND)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (It is uncertain whether Tolkien rejected this word or not; in any case, }{\b\i\f1 vinya}{\i\f1 
 is only attested with the meaning "new" in Tolkien's later Quenya.)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Vinyamar}{\f1  *"New Dwelling" }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Vinyari\'eb}{\f1  "Newyear's Day" }{\i\f1 (PM:127)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab V\'edress\'eb}{\f1  fourth month of the year, "April" }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 v\'edrin}{\f1  "a magic glassy substance of great lucency used in fashioning the Moon. Used of things of great and pure transparency." }{\i\f1 (LT2:339)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab vista}{\f1  "air as substance"}{\i\f1  (WIS (WIL) )
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 v\'f3}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (actually spelt }{\b\i\f1 v\'f4}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 , also }{\b\f1 vondo}{\f1 , "son" }{\i\f1 (LT2:336; in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 yondo}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 vor}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 voro}{\f1  "ever" }{\i\f1 (BOR, LT1:250, 273 [only }{\b\i\f1 voro}{\i\f1  in the }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1 ]; also in }{\f1 Narqelion}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab vorima}{\f1  "continual, repeated"}{\i\f1  (BOR)}{\f1 , early "Qenya" gloss "everlasting" }{\i\f1 (LT1:250)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab v\'f3rima}{\f1  (more or less identical to }{\b\f1 vorima}{\f1  above?) "steadfast in allegiance, in keeping oath or promise, faithful"; genitive }{\b\f1 v\'f3rimo}{\f1  in a variant of }{\i\f1 CO}{\f1 ; see UT:317
\par }{\b\f1 \tab voro}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 voro}{\f1 - "ever, continually"}{\i\f1  (BOR, Narqelion)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab vorogandel\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (read *}{\b\i\f1 vorongandel\'eb}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 voro\'f1gandele}{\i\f1 ) }{\f1 "harping on one tune", continual repetition }{\i\f1 (BOR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab voronda}{\f1  "steadfast in allegiance, in keeping oath or promise, faithful", used as a title of }{\b\f1 Elendil Voronda}{\f1  "Elendil the Faithful"; genitive }{\b\f1 Vorondo}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 CO}{\f1 . Only glossed "faithful" in LT1:250.

\par }{\b\f1 \tab Vorondil}{\f1  masc.name, *"Faithful friend" }{\i\f1 (Appendix A)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab voronwa}{\f1  "enduring, long-lasting" }{\i\f1 (BOR)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab voronw\'eb}{\f1  "steadfastness, loyalty, faithfulness"}{\i\f1  (CO)}{\f1 , also masc. name }{\b\f1 Voronw\'eb}{\f1  "the Faithful" }{\i\f1 (PM:340, BOR\'d3N, LT1:250)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab voronwi\'eb}{\f1  "endurance, lasting quality" }{\i\f1 (BOR)}{\f1 
\par 
\par <W>
\par \tab }{\b\f1 w\'e1}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (actually spelt }{\b\i\f1 w\'e2}{\f1 ) "wind" }{\i\f1 (LT1:266)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab wai}{\f1  (what the primitive element }{\i\f1 wei }{\f1 "wind, weave" became in Quenya; therefore confused with the stem WAY "enfold") }{\i\f1 (WEY)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab waia}{\f1  > }{\b\f1 vaia}{\f1  "envelope", especially of the Outer Sea or Air enfolding the world within the Ilurambar or world-walls }{\i\f1 (WAY)}{\f1  (also }{\b\i\f1 vaiya}{\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 waiya}{\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 \tab waiwa}{\f1  "wind" }{\i\f1 (W\'c2/WAWA/WAIWA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab waiya}{\f1  > }{\b\f1 vaiya}{\f1  (also }{\b\i\f1 vaia}{\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 waia}{\f1 ) "envelope", especially of the Outer Sea or Air enfolding the world within the Ilurambar or world-walls }{\i\f1 (WAY)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab w\'e1n}{\f1  > }{\b\f1 v\'e1n}{\f1  "goose" }{\i\f1 (WA-N)}{\f1 .}{\i\f1 
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 wanwa}{\f1  "great gale" }{\i\f1 (LT1:266)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 wanwavoit\'eb}{\f1  "windy" }{\i\f1 (LT1:266)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b wa\'fear}{ older form of }{\b vasar}{, q.v. }{\i (VT42:9)}{\i\f1 
\par }{\f1 \tab -}{\b\f1 w\'eb}{\f1  a suffix occurring in many personal names, generally but not exclusively masculine; derived from a stem simply meaning "person" }{\i\f1 (PM:340, WJ:399)}{\f1 . In }{\i\f1 Etym}{\f1 , -}{\b\f1 w\'eb}{\f1 
 is simply defined as an element that is frequent in masculine names, and it is there derived from a stem }{\i\f1 (WEG)}{\f1  having to do with "(manly) vigour".
\par }{\b\f1 \tab w\'e9n}{\f1  "greenness, youth, freshness" }{\i\f1 (GWEN)}{\f1 , blended with }{\b\f1 wend\'eb}{\f1  "maid"}{\i\f1 
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 wen}{\f1  "maid, girl" (*}{\b\f1 wend}{\f1 -), in early "Qenya" also }{\b\f1 wendi}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Tolkien's later Quenya form }{\b\i\f1 wend\'eb}{\i\f1  occurs in MC:215 and in Etym, stems GWEN, WEN/WENED)}{\f1 . }{\i\f1 (LT1:271, 273) 
}{\f1 
\par \tab -}{\b\f1 wen}{\f1  "maiden", a frequent ending in feminine names like }{\b\f1 E\'e4rwen}{\f1  *"Sea-maiden" }{\i\f1 (SA:wen)}{\f1 . Early "Qenya" also has -}{\b\f1 wen}{\f1 , feminine patronymic *"daughter of" }{\i\f1 (LT1:271, 273)}{\f1 
, but the the patronymic ending seems to be -}{\b\f1 iel}{\f1  "-daughter" in Tolkien's later Quenya.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab wend\'eb}{\f1  "maid" }{\i\f1 (GWEN)}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 wend\'eb}{\f1  > }{\b\f1 vend\'eb}{\f1  "maiden"}{\i\f1  (WEN/WENED). }{\f1 Early "Qenya" also had }{\b\f1 wendi}{\f1 
 "maid, girl", but this would probably be a plural in Tolkien's later Quenya. }{\i\f1 (LT1:271)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 wendel\'eb}{\f1  "maidenhood" }{\i\f1 (LT1:271)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab w\'e9n\'eb}{\f1  > }{\b\f1 v\'e9n\'eb}{\f1  "virginity" }{\i\f1 (WEN/WENED)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 went\'eb}{\f1  "brook" }{\i\f1 (GL:46)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab wenya}{\f1  "green, yellow-green, fresh" }{\i\f1 (GWEN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab w\'e9ra}{\f1  Old Quenya form of }{\b\f1 v\'e9ra}{\f1 , q.v.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab wil}{\f1 - "fly" (1st pers. aorist }{\b\f1 wilin}{\f1  "I fly"; changed from }{\b\f1 vilin}{\f1  pa.t. }{\b\f1 vill\'eb}{\f1 ; new past tense presumably }{\b\f1 *will\'eb}{\f1 )}{\i\f1  (WIL)}{\f1 . The early "Qenya" lexicon has}{\i\f1  }{
\b\f1 wili}{\f1 - "sail, float, fly" }{\i\f1 (LT1:273)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 wilin}{\f1  "bird" }{\i\f1 (LT1:273; if this "Qenya" word is to be used in LotR-style Quenya, it must not be confused with the 1st pers. aorist of the verb }{\b\i\f1 wil}{\i\f1 -)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab wilma}{\f1  "air, lower air" (distinct from the 'upper' air of the stars, or the 'outer')}{\i\f1  (WIL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab wilwa}{\f1  "vague, fluttering to and fro" (}{\i\f1 Markirya). }{\f1 A similar word in the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1  was struck out: [}{\b\f1 wilwa}{\f1  > }{\b\f1 vilwa}{\f1 
] "air, lower air" (distinct from the 'upper' air of the stars, or the 'outer') }{\i\f1 (WIL)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 wilwarin}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 wilwarind}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 wilwarindi}{\f1 ) "butterfly" (}{\i\f1 Markirya, WIL, LT1:273)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 Wilwarin}{\f1  name of a constellation, tentatively identified as Cassiopeia }{\i\f1 (Silm)}{\f1 
. "Qenya" adjective }{\b\f1 wilwarinde\'ebn}{\f1  "like butterflies" }{\i\f1 (MC:216)}{\f1 ; "Qenya" similative form }{\b\f1 wilwarindon}{\f1  "as a butterfly" }{\i\f1 (MC:213, 220) 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab wilya}{\f1  see }{\b\f1 vilya}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 winda}{\f1  "woof" }{\i\f1 (LT1:254)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 windel\'eb}{\f1  "loom" }{\i\f1 (LT1:254)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab windya}{\f1  > }{\b\f1 vinya}{\f1  "pale blue"}{\i\f1  (WIN/WIND)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (It is uncertain whether Tolkien rejected this word or not; in any case, }{\b\i\f1 vinya}{\i\f1  means "new" in his later versions of Quenya.)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab winga}{\f1  "foam, spray" }{\i\f1 (Markirya)}{\f1 . Also }{\b\f1 wing\'eb}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab wing\'eb}{\f1  "foam, crest of wave, crest" }{\i\f1 (WIG)}{\f1 ; "foam, spindrift" }{\i\f1 (LT1:273)}{\f1 . Also }{\b\f1 winga}{\f1  (so in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 ).
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Wingelot}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 Wingel\'f3t\'eb}{\f1  "foam-flower", name of Earendel's }{\i\f1 [sic]}{\f1  boat }{\i\f1 (WIG, LOT(H) )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab wingil}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 wingild}{\f1 -, as in pl. }{\b\f1 Wingildi}{\f1 ) "nymph" }{\i\f1 (WIG, LT1:273)}{\f1 ; "Qenya" pl. }{\b\f1 wingildin }{\f1 "foam-fays, foam-maidens" }{\i\f1 (MC:216)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 wingilot}{\f1  "foamflower, E\'e4rendel's boat" }{\i\f1 (LT1:273; in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 Wingelot}{\i\f1 , }{\b\i\f1 Wingel\'f3te}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab winta}{\f1 - "scatter, blow about" (both transitive and intransitive) }{\i\f1 (PM:376)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 wintil}{\f1  "a glint" }{\i\f1 (LT1:261)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab [}{\b\f1 winya}{\f1  > }{\b\f1 vinya}{\i\f1  (WIN/WIND)}{\f1 ]
\par \tab }{\b\f1 Wiril\'f3m\'eb}{\f1  a name of the great Spider (Ungoliant) }{\i\f1 (LT1:254)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 wist\'eb}{\f1  "weft" }{\i\f1 (LT1:254)}{\f1 
\par 
\par <Y>
\par }{\b\f1 \tab y\'e1}{\f1  "formerly, ago" }{\i\f1 (YA)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab ya}{\f1  relative pronoun "which, what" (attested in the }{\i\f1 Arctic}{\f1  sentence), with locative suffix in }{\i\f1 Nam\'e1ri\'eb}{\f1 : see *}{\b\f1 yass\'eb}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yaht}{\f1 - see}{\b\f1  }{\b\i\f1 yat}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (YAK)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 yaima}{\f1  "implement" (evidently noun) }{\i\f1 (GL:37)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab yaim\'eb}{\f1  "wailing" (noun), from which is derived the adjective }{\b\f1 yaim\'eba}{\f1  "wailing", pl. }{\b\f1 yaimi\'eb}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 Markirya
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 yaisa}{\f1  "steel" }{\i\f1 (GL:37)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab yaiw\'eb}{\f1  "mocking, scorn" }{\i\f1 (YAY)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yal}{\f1 - "summon". In }{\b\f1 enyali\'eb}{\f1  "to recall"  }{\i\f1 (Notes on CO, UT:317)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yallum\'eb}{\f1  "at last" }{\i\f1 (FS)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yalm\'eb}{\f1  "clamour" }{\i\f1 (\'d1GAL/\'d1GALAM)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 yalt\'eb}{\f1  "bridge" }{\i\f1 (GL:37)}{\f1 ; rather }{\b\f1 yanta}{\f1  in Tolkien's later Quenya
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab yal\'fam\'eb}{\f1  "former times"}{\i\f1  (YA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yal\'fam\'eba}{\f1  "olden" }{\i\f1 (YA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yal\'famess\'eb}{\f1  "once upon a time"}{\i\f1  (YA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab y\'e1m\'eb}{\f1  "yawning" }{\i\f1 (MC:214; cf. the stem }{\b\i\f1 YAG}{\i\f1  in the Etymologies) }{\b\f1 
\par \tab y\'e1na}{\f1  "holy place, fane, sanctuary" }{\i\f1 (YAN)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yana}{\f1  "that" (the former) }{\i\f1 (YA)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 yando}{\f1  "also" }{\i\f1 (QL:104)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yanga}{\f1 - "to yawn" }{\i\f1 (YAG)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yanta}{\f1  "bridge", also name of tengwa 35 }{\i\f1 (Appendix E)}{\f1 ; in the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 yanta}{\f1  is defined as "yoke" }{\i\f1 (YAT)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yanw\'eb}{\f1  "bridge, joining, isthmus" }{\i\f1 (YAT)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yar }{\f1 "to whom" }{\i\f1 (MC:215; this may be "Qenya", but on the other hand both the relative pronoun }{\b\i\f1 ya}{\i\f1  and an allativic ending -}{\b\i\f1 r}{\i\f1  are still valid in Tolkien's later Quenya, cf. }{\b\i\f1 mir}{\i\f1  "
into")}{\b\f1 
\par \tab y\'e1r}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 yar}{\f1 -, as in dat.sg. }{\b\f1 yaren}{\f1 ) "blood"}{\i\f1  (YAR; the }{\f1 Silmarillion}{\i\f1  appendix gives }{\b\i\f1 serc\'eb}{\i\f1  instead)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab y\'e1ra}{\f1  "ancient, belonging to or descending from former times" }{\i\f1 (YA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab y\'e1r\'eb}{\f1  "former days" }{\i\f1 (YA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab y\'e1r\'eba}{\f1  "olden" }{\i\f1 (YA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab y\'e1ress\'eb}{\f1  "once upon a time" }{\i\f1 (YA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yarra}{\f1 - "growl, snarl" (stem used as participle in }{\i\f1 Markirya}{\f1 , translated "snarling")
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 yaru}{\f1  "gloom, blight" }{\i\f1 (GL:37)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\f1 \tab #}{\b\f1 yass\'eb}{\f1  (1) "in which", pl. }{\b\f1 yassen}{\f1  referring back to a plural noun. }{\i\f1 (Nam, RGEO:66) 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yass\'eb}{\f1  (2) "once upon a time" }{\i\f1 (YA)}{\f1 ; writers should rather use }{\b\f1 yal\'famess\'eb}{\f1  or }{\b\f1 y\'e1ress\'eb}{\f1  of similar meaning to avoid confusion with # 1 above.}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yat}{\f1  (}{\b\f1 yaht}{\f1 -) "neck" }{\i\f1 (YAK)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yatta}{\f1  "narrow neck, isthmus" }{\i\f1 (YAK)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 yav}{\f1 - "bear fruit" }{\i\f1 (LT1:273, given in the form }{\b\i\f1 yavin}{\i\f1  and glossed "bears fruit"; this would have to mean "I bear fruit" in Tolkien's later Quenya: 1st pers. sg. aorist)}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 y\'e1va}{\f1  "fruit" }{\i\f1 (LT1:273; in Tolkien's later Quenya }{\b\i\f1 y\'e1v\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par \tab }{\b\f1 y\'e1van}{\f1  "harvest, autumn" }{\i\f1 (LT1:273; in LotR-style Quenya }{\b\i\f1 y\'e1vi\'eb}{\i\f1 )}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab Yavanna}{\f1 , }{\i\f1 Yav-anna}{\f1 , "Fruit-giver", name of a Vali\'eb }{\i\f1 (YAB, ANA}{\i\f1\super 1}{\i\f1 ; cf. }{\b\i\f1 y\'e1v\'eb}{\i\f1 )
\par }\pard \fi720\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 yavannam\'edr\'eb}{\f1  "Yavanna-jewel", name of a tree with globed and scarlet fruits }{\i\f1 (UT:167)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 Yavanni\'eb}{\f1  name of the ninth month of the year, "September" }{\i\f1 (Appendix D, SA:y\'e1v\'eb)}{\f1 
\par #}{\b\f1 Yavannild\'eb}{\f1  pl. }{\b\f1 Yavannildi}{\f1  "Followers of Yavanna", Elvish women who knew and kept the secret of the making of }{\i\f1 coimas}{\f1  (lembas) }{\i\f1 (PM:404)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab y\'e1v\'eb}{\f1  "fruit" }{\i\f1 (YAB)}{\f1 , cf. }{\b\f1 Yavanna}{\f1 . Early "Qenya" has }{\b\f1 y\'e1va}{\f1 , LT1:273.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab y\'e1vi\'eb}{\f1  "autumn" }{\i\f1 (SA:y\'e1v\'eb)}{\f1 ; "autumn, harvest", in the calendar of Imladris a precisely defined period of 54 days, but also used without any exact definition }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)}{\f1 ; }{\b\f1 y\'e1vi\'e9r\'eb}{
\f1  *"Autumn-day", a day outside the months in the Steward's Reckoning, inserted between }{\b\f1 Yavanni\'eb}{\f1  and }{\b\f1 Narqueli\'eb}{\f1  (September and October) }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab y\'e1w\'eb}{\f1  "ravine, cleft, gulf"}{\i\f1  (YAG)
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 yax\'eb}{\f1  "milch cow", also }{\b\f1 yaxi}{\f1  "cow" (in Tolkien's later Quenya, the latter would probably be a plural) }{\i\f1 (GL:36)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab ye}{\f1  "is" }{\i\f1 (FS)}{\f1 ; apparently replaced by }{\b\f1 n\'e1}{\f1  in Tolkien's later Quenya. Future tense }{\b\f1 y\'e9va}{\f1 , q.v.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab y\'e9}{\f1  untranslated interjection in Aragorn's exclamation when he found the sapling of the White Tree: *"yeah!"
\par \tab [}{\b\f1 yelda}{\f1 ] "friendly, dear as friend"}{\i\f1  (YEL, struck out)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yeld\'eb}{\f1  "daughter" }{\i\f1 (YEL)}{\f1  This word was struck out in Etym, but it may have been restored together with the ending -}{\b\f1 iel}{\f1 , q.v.
\par \tab }{\b\f1 Yelin}{\f1  "winter" }{\i\f1 (LT1:260; LotR-style Quenya has }{\b\i\f1 hr\'edv\'eb}{\i\f1 , and }{\b\i\f1 Yelin}{\i\f1  was probably obsoleted together with the adjective }{\b\i\f1 yelwa}{\i\f1 
 "cold", that appears with a different meaning in the }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1 ).}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yello}{\f1  "call, shout of triumph" }{\i\f1 (GYEL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yelma}{\f1  "loathing" (prob. noun; perhaps a misreading; we would rather expect *}{\b\f1 yelm\'eb}{\f1 ) }{\i\f1 (DYEL)
\par }{\f1 \tab [}{\b\f1 yelm\'eb}{\f1 ] (not glossed; the etymology may suggest *"friendship") }{\i\f1 (YEL, struck out)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yelta}{\f1 - "to loathe" }{\i\f1 (DYEL)
\par }{\f1 \tab }{\b\f1 yelwa}{\f1  (1) "loathsome"}{\i\f1  (DYEL)
\par \tab }{\b\f1 yelwa}{\f1  (2) "cold" }{\i\f1 (LT1:260 - this "Qenya" word is certainly obsoleted by # 1 above. Use }{\b\i\f1 ringa}{\i\f1 .)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab y\'e9n}{\f1  (pl. }{\b\f1 y\'e9ni}{\f1  in }{\i\f1 Nam}{\f1 , obsoleting }{\b\f1 yen}{\f1 [}{\b\f1 i}{\f1 ] in the }{\i\f1 Etymologies}{\f1 , stem YEN), Elvish "long year" of 144 solar years, 52,596 days }{\i\f1 
(Nam, Appendix D, E; RGEO:66. Tolkien earlier defined }{\b\i\f1 y\'e9n}{\i\f1  as 100 solar years; see PM:126; in the }{\f1 Etymologies}{\i\f1 , stem YEN, it seems to mean simply "year".)}{\f1  }{\b\f1 Y\'e9non\'f3ti\'eb}{\f1  *"reckoning of years" }{
\i\f1 (MR:51)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yen}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 yend\'eb}{\f1  "daughter"}{\i\f1  (Y\'d4/YON. This word replaced another form, but this form may have been restored; see }{\b\i\f1 yeld\'eb}{\i\f1 .)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yenya}{\f1  "last year" }{\i\f1 (YA)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yerna}{\f1  "old, worn" }{\i\f1 (GYER)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yerya}{\f1 - "to wear (out)", also intr. "get old"}{\i\f1  (GYER)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yesta}{\f1  (1) "desire" (noun? verb?)}{\i\f1  (YES)}{\f1  Some would suppose this word is obsoleted by # 2 below.
\par \tab #}{\b\f1 yesta}{\f1  (2) *"first", only attested in the compound }{\b\f1 yestar\'eb}{\f1  (see below), but cf. }{\b\f1 esta}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yestar\'eb}{\f1  *"first-day", the first day of the year (}{\b\f1 loa}{\f1 ), immediately before }{\b\f1 tuil\'eb}{\b\i\f1  }{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Appendix D)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab y\'e9ta}{\f1 - "look at" }{\i\f1 (LT1:262)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab y\'e9va}{\f1  "will be" (also "there will be"), apparently the future tense of }{\b\f1 ye}{\f1 . Once translated "is" (}{\b\f1 \'edr\'eb ilqua y\'e9va n\'f3tina}{\f1 
, "when all is counted"), but this event belongs to the future; hence literally *"when all }{\i\f1 will be}{\f1  counted" }{\i\f1 (FS)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 yo}{\f1  "with" (}{\b\f1 yo hildinyar}{\f1  = *"with my heirs", }{\i\f1 SD:56}{\f1 )
\par }{\b\f1 y\'f3}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("y\'f4")}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 yond}{\f1 - see }{\b\f1 yondo}{\f1 .
\par }{\b\f1 yolo}{\f1 - "stink" }{\i\f1 (GL:41)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab yomeni\'eb}{\f1  "meeting, gathering" (of three or more coming from different directions) }{\i\f1 (WJ:407)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yondo}{\f1  "son" }{\i\f1 (Y\'d4/YON)}{\f1 ; cf. the patronymic ending -}{\b\f1 ion}{\f1 . Early "Qenya" has }{\b\f1 y\'f4}{\f1 , }{\b\f1 yond}{\f1 -, }{\b\f1 yondo}{\f1  "son" }{\i\f1 (LT2:342)}{\f1 
. According to LT2:344, these are poetic words, while }{\b\f1 yondo}{\f1  seems to be the normal word for "son" in LotR-style Quenya. According to LT2:344, }{\b\f1 yondo}{\f1  means "male descendant, usually (great) grandson", but in Tolkien's la
ter Quenya, }{\b\f1 yondo}{\f1  means "son", and the word is so glossed in LT2:342.}{\i\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yual\'eb}{\f1  "twilight" }{\i\f1 (KAL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab y\'facal\'eb}{\f1  }{\i\f1 ("k")}{\f1  "twilight"}{\i\f1  (KAL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab y\'fala}{\f1  "ember, smouldering wood" }{\i\f1 (YUL)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yulda}{\f1  "draught", pl. }{\b\f1 yuldar}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (Nam, RGEO:66)
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yulma}{\f1  (1) "cup" (}{\i\f1 Nam}{\f1 , RGEO:67), "drinking-vessel" }{\i\f1 (WJ:416)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yulma}{\f1  (2) "brand" }{\i\f1 (YUL)}{\f1 . May have been obsoleted by # 1 above.
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yulm\'eb}{\f1  (1) "drinking, carousal" }{\i\f1 (WJ:416)}{\f1 
\par }{\b\f1 \tab yulm\'eb}{\f1  (2) "red [?heat]" }{\i\f1 (the gloss was illegible)}{\f1  }{\i\f1 (YUL)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \fi708\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 yulu}{\f1 - "carry" }{\i\f1 (GL:38)}{\f1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\f1 \tab y\'fayo}{\f1  "both" }{\i\f1 (Y\'db)}{\f1 
\par }}